 t e c h n o lo g i e s  a n d  t e c h n i q u e s

Advances in protein structure 
prediction and design

 3,4*

 1,2* and Philip Bradley 

Brian Kuhlman 
Abstract | The prediction of protein three-dimensional structure from amino acid sequence has 
been a grand challenge problem in computational biophysics for decades, owing to its intrinsic 
scientific interest and also to the many potential applications for robust protein structure 
prediction algorithms, from genome interpretation to protein function prediction. More recently , 
the inverse problem — designing an amino acid sequence that will fold into a specified 
three-dimensional structure — has attracted growing attention as a potential route to the 
rational engineering of proteins with functions useful in biotechnology and medicine. Methods 
for the prediction and design of protein structures have advanced dramatically in the past 
decade. Increases in computing power and the rapid growth in protein sequence and structure 
databases have fuelled the development of new data-intensive and computationally demanding 
approaches for structure prediction. New algorithms for designing protein folds and protein–
protein interfaces have been used to engineer novel high-order assemblies and to design from 
scratch fluorescent proteins with novel or enhanced properties, as well as signalling proteins  
with therapeutic potential. In this Review , we describe current approaches for protein structure 
prediction and design and highlight a selection of the successful applications they have enabled.

The stunning diversity of molecular functions per-
formed by naturally evolved proteins is made possible by 
their finely tuned three-dimensional structures, which 
are in turn determined by their genetically encoded 
amino acid sequences. A predictive understanding of the 
relationship between amino acid sequence and protein 
structure would therefore open up new avenues, both for 
the prediction of function from genome sequence data 
and also for the rational engineering of novel protein 
functions through the design of amino acid sequences 
with specific structures. The past decade has seen dra-
matic improvements in our ability to predict and design 
the three-dimensional structures of proteins, with 
potentially far-reaching implications for medicine and 
our understanding of biology. New machine-learning 
algorithms have been developed that analyse the pat-
terns of correlated mutations in protein families, to 
predict structurally interacting residues from sequence 
information alone1,2. Improved protein energy functions3,4 
have for the first time made it possible to start with an 
approximate structure prediction model and move it 
closer to the experimentally determined structure by 
an energy-guided refinement process5,6. Advances in 
protein conformational sampling and sequence optimi-
zation have permitted the design of novel protein struc-
tures and complexes7,8, some of which show promise  
as therapeutics9.

These advances in protein structure prediction and 
design have been fuelled by technological breakthroughs 
as well as by a rapid growth in biological databases. 
Protein-modelling algorithms (Box 1) are computation-
ally demanding both to develop and to apply. The rapid 
increase in computing power available to researchers 
(both CPU-based and, increasingly, GPU-based com-
puting power) facilitates rapid benchmarking of new  
algorithms and enables their application to larger mole-
cules and molecular assemblies. At the same time, 
next-generation sequencing has fuelled a dramatic 
increase in protein sequence databases as genomic 
and metagenomic sequencing efforts have expanded10. 
Advances in software and automation have increased the 
pace of experimental structure determination, speeding 
the growth of the database of experimentally determined 
protein structures (the Protein Data Bank (PDB))11, which 
now contains close to 150,000 macromolecular structures. 
Deep-learning algorithms12 that have revolutionized image 
processing and speech recognition are now being adopted 
by protein modellers seeking to take advantage of these 
expanded sequence and structural databases.

In this Review, we highlight a selection of recent 
breakthroughs that these technological advances have 
enabled. We describe current approaches to the pre-
diction and design of protein structures, focusing pri-
marily on template-free methods that do not require an 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 681

1Department of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA.

2Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA.

3Computational Biology 
Program, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

4Institute for Protein Design, 
University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

*e-mail: bkuhlman@ 
email.unc.edu; pbradley@
fredhutch.org
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41580-019-0163-x

 

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsBox 1 | Navigating protein energy landscapes

Protein conformational energy landscapes are complex, high-dimensional surfaces with many local minima. Navigating 
these landscapes in order to locate low-energy basins for prediction and design requires efficient sampling methods and 
accurate energy functions. In gradient-based optimization approaches (see the figure, upper left panel), the derivatives  
of the energy function with respect to the flexible degrees of freedom (e.g. the atomic coordinates or backbone torsion 
angles) are calculated in order to proceed in the direction in which the energy decreases most rapidly. Gradient-based 
optimization is effective at finding the nearest local minimum in the energy landscape, but it will not generally locate the 
global minimum. monte Carlo sampling approaches employ randomly selected conformational moves and occasional 
uphill steps to escape local minima (see the figure, lower panels). In metropolis monte Carlo44, sampling moves are 
accepted (green arrows) or rejected (red arrows) on the basis of the change in energy: downhill moves that decrease  
the energy are accepted with probability 1, whereas uphill moves (dashed arrows) are accepted with a probability P that 
exponentially decreases as a function of the energy change. examples of the move sets used for monte Carlo simulations 
include fragment-replacement moves, in which a continuous backbone segment in the current conformation is replaced 
with an alternative conformation from a fragment library, and side-chain rotamer substitutions. A popular alternative to 
monte Carlo sampling is molecular dynamics simulation (see the figure, upper right panel), in which the conformational 
sampling is dictated by Newton’s laws of motion applied to the potential energy function of the molecular system. Given a 
starting set of atomic positions and velocities, the force acting on each atom is calculated by taking the gradient of the 
potential energy, and a resulting acceleration is derived from Newton’s second law (F = ma). A very small step forwards in 
time is taken (typically of the order of a few femtoseconds), and new positions and velocities are calculated on the basis  
of the size of the time step and the old positions, velocities and accelerations. With an accurate energy function and 
sufficiently small time steps, a long molecular-dynamics simulation provides broad sampling of the energy landscape and 
also gives a realistic picture of how individual molecules evolve over time. The challenge of modelling approaches based 
on molecular dynamics is that anywhere from millions to trillions of time steps must be conducted to reach biologically 
relevant time scales, requiring high-performance software and, in some cases, even special-purpose supercomputers170,171.

Exploring the energy landscape

Gradient-based minimization

Molecular dynamics

y
g
r
e
n
E

y
g
r
e
n
E

Start

Finish

Nearest energy
minimum

Finish

Conformation

Start

Force ﬁeld calculations
for each atom determine
time progression in
femtosecond steps

F = ma

v = dx/dt

Metropolis Monte Carlo

Monte Carlo moves

P = 0.03

ΔE = 2.1

P = 0.58

P = 1

Start

ΔE = 0.33

P = 1

P = 0.07

P = 1

ΔE = 1.6

Global
minimum

Finish
Conformation

Fragment

replacement

Rotamer

substitution

experimentally determined structure as a template. The 
strengths and weaknesses of these modelling approaches, 
as well as their current and potential applications, will be 
discussed. Finally, we comment on the broader practi-
cal implications of these developments for the fields of  
biology and medicine.

Protein-folding forces
Proteins possess the remarkable ability to fold sponta-
neously into precisely determined three-dimensional  
structures. Refolding experiments have established that 
the information required to specify a protein’s folded con-
formation (its native state) is completely contained in its  
linear amino acid sequence13–15. According to Anfinsen’s 
thermodynamic hypothesis, this information is encoded 

in the shape of the energy landscape of the polypeptide: 
the native state is the one with the lowest free energy16,17. 
This hypothesis forms the basis for a general approach to 
protein structure prediction that combines sampling of 
alternative conformations with scoring to rank them by 
energy and identify the lowest energy state18–21. The chief 
obstacle to the success of this energy-guided approach, 
first identified by Cyrus Levinthal as a conceptual barrier 
to protein folding on biological timescales22, is the vast 
space of potential conformations: even supposing that 
each amino acid has only a limited, discrete set of possi-
ble backbone states, the total size of the conformational 
space that must be searched grows exponentially with 
chain length, and very quickly becomes astronomical. 
The solution to this dilemma lies in the recognition that 

Protein energy functions
Functions that correspond  
to a mathematical model  
of the molecular forces that 
determine protein structures 
and interactions. The choice  
of an energy function defines  
a map from structures onto 
energy values, referred to as  
an energy landscape, which 
can guide structure prediction 
and design simulations. Typical 
protein energy functions are 
linear combinations of multiple 
terms, each term capturing a 
distinct energetic contribution 
(van der Waals interactions, 
electrostatics, desolvation), 
with the weights and atomic 
parameters for these terms 
chosen by a parameterization 
procedure that seeks to 
optimize the agreement 
between the quantities 
predicted from the energy 
function and the corresponding 
values derived from 
experiments or from quantum 
chemistry calculations on small 
chemical systems.

Deep learning
A form of machine learning 
that employs artificial  
neural networks with many 
internal-processing layers to 
recognize patterns in large  
and complex datasets, such as 
visual images and written and 
spoken language.

682 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

www.nature.com/nrmReviewsVan der Waals interactions
inter-atomic or inter-molecular 
interactions that are 
individually weak (much 
weaker than covalent or ionic 
bonds) and relatively 
short-ranged.

Rotamers
A discrete set of conformations 
frequently adopted by amino 
acid side chains.

Degrees of freedom
The free parameters in  
a system that determine  
its structure and, hence, its 
energy. They can be continuous, 
such as a real-valued backbone 
torsion angle or atomic position, 
or discrete (permitting only a 
finite number of alternatives). 
owing to strong torsional 
preferences, side-chain 
conformations can be 
successfully modelled using  
a discrete set of rotamers, 
identified by analysis of the 
structural database.

it is not necessary to explore the entire conformational 
space in order to identify the native state: the energy 
landscape is not a flat ‘golf course’ with a single native 
‘hole’; rather, directional cues impart an overall funnel 
shape to the landscape and guide sampling towards 
near-native conformations19,23 (Fig. 1a). These directional 
cues can arise from sequence-local residue interactions 
that bias short stretches of the chain towards form-
ing specific secondary structures, or from favourable 
long-range, non-local packing interactions that can be 
formed even before the global native fold is reached.

The driving force favouring the folding of water- 
soluble, globular proteins is thought to be the burial of 
hydrophobic amino acid side chains away from water24; 
folding is opposed by the loss of configurational entropy 
that accompanies the collapse of a flexible polypeptide 
chain into a defined 3D conformation. Tight packing of 
nonpolar side chains in the protein core enhances attrac-
tive van der Waals interactions and eliminates entropically 
unfavourable internal cavities (Fig. 1b). Moreover, this 
jigsaw puzzle-like packing is achieved while accommo-
dating strong backbone and side-chain torsional prefer-
ences that restrict the observed torsion angle distributions 

(lower panels in Fig. 1b), effectively reducing side-chain 
flexibility to the neighbourhood of a discrete set of 
rotamers at each position. Intra-protein hydrogen bonds 
and salt bridges largely compensate for the loss of inter-
actions with water, as polar groups are buried during 
folding and hence these interactions contribute less to 
the stability of the native state than to its specificity (that 
is, they help discriminate the native state from other com-
pact states). Whereas hydrophobic burial and backbone 
hydrogen bonding can be detected from low-resolution 
structural models, the tight core packing and absence 
of buried, unsatisfied polar groups that distinguish the 
native state require explicit modelling of the side-chain 
degrees of freedom. As a result, molecular modelling 
approaches for structure prediction and design often 
employ multiple levels of resolution: large-scale confor-
mational sampling is performed with a computationally 
efficient coarse-grained energy function that captures 
hydrophobic burial, formation of secondary structure, 
and avoidance of atomic overlaps25–27; final protein model 
selection and refinement requires explicit modelling of 
the amino acid side chains using a more time-intensive, 
high-resolution atomistic energy function (Fig. 1c).

Folding energy landscapes

Protein energetics

a

Golf course

Funnel

b

Polar

N

N

c

Coarse-grained
energy functions

Atomistic functions

Nonpolar

Hydrophobic
patterning

Backbone and side-chain

hydrogen bonds

N

N

• Smooth but also distort

the landscape, leading to
inaccuracies

• Faster to compute

• More accurate
• Sensitive to structural

detail

• Slower to compute

Backbone

Side-chain

i
s
P

C
h
2

i

Phi

Isoleucine

Chi1

Chi1

Chi2

Phi Psi

Backbone and side-chain

torsional preferences

Tight side-

chain packing

Fig. 1 | Protein-folding landscapes and energies. a | Simplified, two-dimensional representations of ‘golf course’ and 
‘funnel’-shaped energy landscapes. Identifying the native energy minimum (‘N’) in the landscape on the left requires 
exhaustive exploration, whereas a simple downhill search from most starting points will locate the native state in the 
landscape on the right. b | Energetic features that distinguish the protein native state include: hydrophobic patterning 
(shown here in a cutaway view of the small protein ubiquitin), with burial of nonpolar side chains in the protein core; 
backbone and side-chain hydrogen bonding (hydrogen bonds are shown as dotted green lines); tight side-chain packing 
(visible in a slice through a protein core); and restricted backbone and side-chain torsion angle distributions (evident in the 
highly focused two-dimensional probability distributions of backbone — phi angle versus psi angle — and side-chain — 
chi1 angle versus chi2 angle — torsion angles for the amino acid isoleucine). c | Computational models of protein energetics 
offer a trade-off between speed and accuracy. Coarse-grained models are computationally efficient and effectively smooth 
the energy landscape, permitting large-scale sampling; however, they also introduce inaccuracies such as false minima  
(for example, the blue basin to the left of the native minimum in this part, highlighted with an arrow). High-resolution, 
atomically detailed energy functions are more accurate, but also slower to evaluate and sensitive to structural detail, which 
introduces bumpiness (many local minima) into the landscape and makes them harder to navigate efficiently.

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 683

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsPhi angle
A torsion angle (or dihedral 
angle) that describes rotation 
about the bond that connects 
the backbone nitrogen and the 
backbone Cα carbon of an 
amino acid in a polypeptide 
chain. it is one of the two 
primary degrees of freedom 
(along with the psi angle)  
per amino acid residue  
that proteins use to adopt 
alternative conformations.

Psi angle
A torsion angle (or dihedral 
angle) that describes rotation 
about the bond that connects 
the backbone Cα carbon and 
backbone carbonyl carbon of 
an amino acid in a polypeptide 
chain. it is one of the two 
primary degrees of freedom 
(along with the phi angle)  
per amino acid residue  
that proteins use to adopt 
alternative conformations.

Chi1 angle
A torsion angle (or dihedral 
angle) in amino acid side 
chains that is numbered on  
the basis of the proximity in 
chemical connectivity of the 
bond to the protein backbone. 
Chi1 refers to rotation about 
the bond closest to the 
backbone, chi2 is the next 
closest position and so on. 
Some amino acids, such as 
alanine and glycine, have no 
rotatable bonds or torsion 
angles, while others, such as 
lysine and arginine, have up  
to four.

Protein structure prediction
There are two general approaches to predicting the struc-
ture of a protein of interest (the ‘target’): template-based 
modelling, in which the previously determined structure 
of a related protein is used to model the unknown struc-
ture of the target; and template-free modelling, which 
does not rely on global similarity to a structure in the 
PDB and hence can be applied to proteins with novel 
folds. Historically, the methods applied in these two 
approaches have been quite distinct, with template-based 
modelling focusing on the detection of, and align-
ment to, a related protein of known structure, and 
template-free modelling relying on large-scale confor-
mational sampling and the application of physics-based 
energy functions. Recently, however, the line between 
these approaches has begun to blur, as template-based 
methods have incorporated energy-guided model 
refinement, and template-free methods have employed 
machine  learning  and  fragment-based  sampling 
approaches to exploit the information in the struc-
tural database (although template-based methods still 
retain an increased accuracy for targets with detectable 
sequence similarity to the entries in the PDB). Here we 
provide a brief introduction to template-based model-
ling methods, and then turn to template-free modelling 
and describe recent developments in that area.

Template-based modelling
The steps in standard template-based modelling include 
selection of a suitable structural template; alignment 
of the target sequence to the template structure; and 
molecular modelling to account for mutations, inser-
tions and deletions present in the target–template align-
ment. Closely related templates can be detected by using 
single-sequence search methods such as BLAST28 to scan 
the PDB sequences. To detect more distantly related 
templates, a target sequence profile29,30 built from a 
multiple-sequence alignment can be used to scan a data-
base of sequence profiles for proteins of known structure 
by profile–profile comparison31,32 or can be matched to a  
library of structural templates to assess sequence–structure  
compatibility33,34. Template selection methods return an 
initial target–template alignment that can be adjusted  
manually, often in an iterative manner after model 
building. Given an alignment to a template, established 
tools35–37 can be used to quickly construct molecular 
models of the target sequence by performing side-chain 
optimization only at mutated positions and by rebuilding 
the backbone around insertions and deletions. For target 
protein sequences that are only distantly related to pro-
teins of known structure, more sophisticated approaches 
that rely on multiple templates and perform aggressive 
backbone conformational sampling may be required37–39. 
Together with available crystal structures, template-based 
modelling approaches can provide structural information 
for roughly two-thirds of known protein families40.

Template-free modelling
Template-free modelling approaches can be applied to 
proteins without global structural similarity to a protein 
in the PDB. Lacking a structural template, these methods 
require a conformational sampling strategy for generating 

candidate models, as well as a ranking criterion by which 
native-like conformations can be selected. The structure 
prediction process without a template (Fig. 2) typically 
begins with the construction of a multiple-sequence 
alignment of the target protein and related sequences. 
The sequences of the target and its homologues are then 
used to predict local structural features, such as second-
ary structure and backbone torsion angles, and non-local 
features, such as residue–residue contacts or inter-residue 
distances across the polypeptide chain. These predicted 
features guide the process of building 3D models of the tar-
get protein structure, which are then refined, ranked and 
compared with one another to select the final predictions.

Fragment assembly. One popular approach to conforma-
tional sampling is fragment assembly, in which models 
are built from short, contiguous backbone fragments 
(typically 3–15 residues in length) taken from proteins of 
known structure41–43 (Fig. 2). Libraries of such fragments, 
typically 20–200 for each local sequence window of the  
target protein, are selected to provide a sampling of  
the possible local backbone structures. Fragment selection  
is typically guided by sequence similarity, as well as 
by predictions of local structural features such as sec-
ondary structure or backbone torsion angles. Building 
full-length 3D models from these fragments employs 
Monte Carlo simulations (Box 1) that start from a random 
or fully extended conformation and proceed by repeat-
edly selecting a random window of the protein (e.g. resi-
dues 22–30) and inserting into that window the structure 
of a randomly selected fragment from the corresponding 
fragment library. The calculated energies of the protein 
model before and after the fragment insertion are then 
compared: if the energy is lower after the fragment 
insertion, the move is accepted, whereas if the energy is 
higher, the fragment insertion is accepted with a prob-
ability that decreases exponentially with the increase in 
energy (the Metropolis criterion44). To generate a popula-
tion of hypothetical models, several thousand such sim-
ulations are conducted, each consisting of thousands of 
fragment insertion trials, leading to a final lowest-energy 
model. Fragment assembly simulations are typically con-
ducted with a reduced representation (e.g. only backbone 
atoms and a single ‘centroid’ side-chain pseudo-atom 
are present) and a coarse-grained energy function that 
is fast to evaluate and defines a relatively smooth energy 
landscape appropriate for large-scale conformational 
sampling. Subsequent atomically detailed refinement 
simulations are then used to rank the candidate mod-
els and select the final predictions. Fragment assembly 
approaches have a number of advantages that contribute 
to their popularity: first, almost all protein structures in 
the PDB are locally similar to other, unrelated structures  
in the database45,46; second, the use of experimentally vali-
dated fragments ensures that the models will generally  
have protein-like local features; third, fragment libraries 
implicitly model the mapping between local sequence 
and structure without requiring an accurate energy 
model of the underlying interactions47; fourth, fragment 
assembly simulations have been proved empirically to 
be an efficient means of exploring the protein conforma-
tional space and are capable of sampling globally correct 

684 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

www.nature.com/nrmReviews*

*

1

Construct multiple-sequence alignment
K T L R G K G I T D E V F P S
K T L E G K A I T K K V W S R
K T L R G K F I A E E A A Q N
E I P E G W F I S K S C A P S
¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨
K T L E G K W V T K E V G P T

Target
Homologue 1
Homologue 2
Homologue 3
Homologue n

*

*

CEEEEECCCCCEEEEEECCCCHHHHHHHHHHHHHCCCHHHEEEEECCCCCCCCCCHHHCCCCCCCEEEEEEEC

Predict local structure

2
Secondary
structure
Phi
Psi

Fragments
(20–200 per
each segment
of the target)

3

Predict residue contacts

N

Correlated mutations

5

Reﬁne and rank models

Landscape projection

Residue–residue
distance constraints

4

Assemble 3D models
• Gradient descent
• Distance geometry
• Fragment assembly

C

Start

Start

4

5

Reﬁnement
trajectory

Energy

Finish

Finish

2

3

6

7

Fig. 2 | Key steps in template-free structure prediction. An accurate multiple-sequence alignment between the target 
protein and its sequence homologues contains valuable information on the amino acid variation between the homologous 
sequences, including correlated patterns of sequence changes occurring at different positions (the green and yellow stars 
highlight pairs of alignment columns displaying amino acid charge and size swapping, respectively) (step 1). The target 
sequence and the multiple-sequence alignment form the basis for predictions of local backbone structure, including 
torsion angles (phi and psi predictions are shown, with red error bars indicating uncertainty) and secondary structure  
(step 2; PSIPRED67 predictions are shown). Libraries of backbone fragments taken from proteins predicted to have similar 
local structures can also be assembled for use in model building. The multiple-sequence alignment can be used to predict 
residue pairs likely to be in spatial contact on the basis of observation of correlated mutations in pairs of alignment 
columns (step 3). These predictions of local structure and residue contacts guide 3D model building with techniques such 
as gradient-based optimization, distance geometry or fragment assembly (step 4; snapshots from a Rosetta42 fragment 
assembly trajectory are shown). Initial 3D models are typically built with a reduced representation and a coarse-grained 
energy function; to better determine near-native predictions, these models are refined with an all-atom energy function 
and compared with one another to identify clusters of similar low-energy conformations, from which representative 
models are chosen as the final predictions (step 5; a 2D principal-component projection of the space of refined models is 
shown, in which each dot represents a single model).

Rosetta
A software package for the 
prediction and design of 
protein structures and 
interactions that implements  
a wide range of backbone and 
side-chain conformational 
sampling algorithms and 
sequence optimization 
methods.

fold models even if some local regions of the target pro-
tein are not well-represented in the fragment library48. 
In the absence of predicted or experimentally deter-
mined residue contact information, fragment assembly 
approaches generally work best on smaller α-helical or 
mixed α–β protein domains, with all-β and/or complex, 
non-local topologies presenting the greatest difficul-
ties (since fragment insertion moves tend to perturb 
long-range contacts).

Model refinement. The high-resolution nature of the 
features that distinguish the native state (side-chain 
packing and hydrogen bonding, for example) means 
that the coarse-grained molecular representations and 
energy functions used in fragment assembly do not have 
the accuracy needed to reliably select near-native mod-
els, nor can they be used to fill in the atomistic details 
required by applications such as structure-based drug 
design. Thus, there is considerable interest in simulation 

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 685

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsapproaches that can take a crude starting model and 
move it closer to the native structure, while improving 
physical realism by eliminating features such as atomic 
overlaps or strained torsion angles. This process, termed 
model refinement, requires an accurate energy function 
as well as a strategy for exploring the conformational 
space nearby the starting model. One conformational 
sampling strategy that has been successfully applied to 
model refinement is molecular dynamics simulation 
(see Box 1). In molecular dynamics-based refinement, 
the starting model is placed in a simulation box sur-
rounded by water molecules, and the trajectory of the 
molecular system through many small steps forwards 
in time is simulated on the basis of Newton’s laws of 
motion and a potential energy function. In one recent 
approach5, improved models sampled during this 
molecular dynamics simulation were identified using 
an all-atom energy function and were taken as start-
ing points for subsequent molecular dynamics simula-
tions to further enhance the conformational sampling. 
Atomically detailed Monte Carlo simulations (see 
Box 1) that incorporate side-chain rotamer sampling 
and energy minimization with the Rosetta software 
package49 have also been used successfully for model 
refinement6. The recent CASP protein structure predic-
tion experiment50 revealed progress in high-resolution 
model refinement, with several groups demonstrating 
substantial improvements in model quality for multiple 
prediction targets. These increases in performance were 
driven in part by enhancements in the accuracy of the 
underlying all-atom energy functions3,4, deriving from 
improved parameterization procedures.

Contact predictions from residue covariation. Analysis 
of multiple sequence alignments for proteins of known 
structure has revealed that pairs of alignment columns 
corresponding to residues in spatial contact often tend to 
show patterns of correlated mutations: when the amino 
acid in one column changes, the amino acid in the other 
column is also likely to change (see the two column 
pairs marked with an asterisk in the alignment in Fig. 2, 
step 1). This covariation between alignment columns 
has been attributed to the need to preserve favourable 
residue–residue interactions such as hydrogen bonds 
or tight packing. One key trend driving improvements 
in template-free modelling has been the increase in the 
accuracy with which these spatial contacts between 
residues can be predicted from the analysis of corre-
lated mutations in multiple-sequence alignments. This 
increase in prediction accuracy has been fuelled by two 
factors: the growth in protein sequence databases driven 
by next-generation sequencing and metagenomics10 
(since larger databases mean deeper multiple-sequence 
alignments, and therefore more power to detect corre-
lated mutations), and the development of global statis-
tical methods that can separate direct residue coupling 
due to spatial proximity from indirect couplings. Early 
attempts to use covariation to predict spatial contacts 
employed ‘local’ measures, such as mutual informa-
tion, that consider each pair of alignment columns 
independently51,52; these approaches suffered from false 
positives due, in part, to transitivity of the statistical 

correlations: if position A is coupled to position B and 
position B is coupled to position C, then positions  
A and C will also tend to show significant coupling, 
even if they are not physically interacting. In ‘global’  
methods53–56, a probabilistic graphical model of the 
entire multiple-sequence alignment is constructed by 
finding the set of direct interactions between align-
ment columns that most parsimoniously explains the 
observed sequence correlations. Putative interacting 
positions then correspond to the direct interactions with 
the highest weights in the model.

Predicted residue–residue contacts derived from 
covariation analysis have been shown to substantially 
improve the accuracy of template-free modelling for 
targets with many sequence homologues. Fragment 
assembly approaches have been extended to allow the 
inclusion of covariation-based distance constraints in 
the energy functions used for folding57–59. A recent study 
employing the Rosetta software package used protein 
sequence data from metagenomic projects to generate 
models for more than 600 protein families of unknown 
structure40. The EVfold60 method uses software tools 
originally developed for structure determination from 
experimental distance constraints (e.g. from NMR or 
cross-linking experiments)61 to build 3D models from 
covariation-derived contacts. This method has been 
successfully applied to the prediction of water-soluble60 
and transmembrane62 protein structures, as well as to 
investigation of the structured states of intrinsically 
disordered proteins63. The major factor limiting the 
utility of covariation-based prediction approaches is 
their dependence on relatively deep multiple-sequence 
alignments (where deep has been defined, for example, 
as containing non-redundant sequences numbering at 
least 64 times the square root of the length of the tar-
get40). Although metagenomic projects have increased 
the available number of homologous sequences, their 
bias towards prokaryotic organisms means that the 
sequence coverage of many eukaryote-specific protein 
families remains too small for accurate predictions. New 
machine-learning approaches that can integrate diverse 
sources of sequence and structural information offer one 
promising avenue forwards in these cases.

Machine  learning  in  protein  structure  prediction. 
Machine-learning techniques have a long history of appli-
cations to protein structure analysis. Machine-learning 
models such as neural networks and support vector 
machines have been applied to prediction of 1D structural 
features such as backbone torsion angles, secondary struc-
ture and the solvent accessibility of residues64–68. Recently, 
the focus of machine-learning applications has shifted to 
2D features, such as residue–residue contact maps and 
inter-residue distance matrices. Recognizing that contact 
maps are similar to 2D images — whose classification and 
interpretation have been among the striking successes of 
deep-learning approaches12 — protein modellers have 
begun to apply deep learning to recognizing patterns in 
the sequences and structures of the proteins in the PDB. 
Convolutional neural networks (Box 2 and Supplementary 
Fig. 1) have demonstrated excellent performance in image 
analysis tasks69, making them a natural choice for the 

686 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

www.nature.com/nrmReviewsprediction of protein contact maps. The question of how 
best to encode information about the target protein for 
input to the neural network is an active research topic. 
Colour images, for example, are often encoded as three 
matrices of real numbers: the intensities of the red, green 
and blue colour channels for all the image pixels (Box 2). 
Methods such as DeepContact70 and RaptorX-Contact2 
use as input features the N×N (where N is the number of 

amino acids in the sequence of the target protein) residue–
residue coupling matrices derived from covariation analy-
ses for the target protein (augmented by predictions of 
local sequence features). In the DeepCov71 and TripletRes 
(Y. Zhang, personal communication) approaches, more of 
the information in the target protein multiple-sequence 
alignment is provided to the network, in the form of 
400 (the square of the number of standard amino acids) 

Box 2 | Deep convolutional neural networks in protein structural analysis

Artificial neural networks encompass one or more sequentially connected layers of processing units (the neurons), which 
transform input features to output predictions. each individual processing unit of the network integrates weighted 
signals coming from connected units in the preceding layer into a single, nonlinear response and passes this response to 
downstream units in the next layer. The weights on the connections between processing units are fitted while training 
the network in order to maximize prediction accuracy. Deep neural networks have many internal layers of processing 
units (tens to thousands) that allow them to perform highly complex, nonlinear transformations of the input features. 
Convolutional neural networks are characterized by a very specific layered connectivity in which each unit receives 
inputs from a local window of units (corresponding to a small square of pixels in an input image, for example)  
in the preceding layer, via a matrix of weights called a convolutional filter (see Supplementary Fig. 1). The layers in 
convolutional neural networks are composed of multiple channels that correspond to different signals extracted from 
the inputs; each channel results from scanning a single convolutional filter over the entire preceding layer. In image 
classification, channels early in the network (closer to the inputs) might recognize specific local geometric features in the 
input image (edges or spots, for example), while later channels correspond to higher-order patterns such as composite 
features. The numbers of layers and channels in the network are typically optimized during the network training process.
A key challenge when applying neural networks to protein structures is the identification of appropriate encodings that 

convert information about the target protein into real-valued features suitable for input into the networks. For inter-residue 
contact prediction, where the desired output is a 2D matrix of contact predictions, one approach is to provide as input  
the 2D matrix of residue–residue covariation scores derived from a multiple-sequence alignment. By learning from many 
examples of known contact maps and covariation matrices fed into the network during training, the network is able to 
identify features of the protein contact maps (recurring secondary structure contacts, for example) that enable it to refine 
the sequence-based input predictions. Analysis of the early convolutional filters in such networks70 has suggested that 
different filters are specialized to detect different modes of interaction (β-hairpins or β–α–β motifs, for example). Recent 
work suggests that providing the neural network with even more information from the multiple-sequence alignment —  
400 matrices of amino acid pair frequencies or covariances (one for each of the 400 ordered amino acid pairs, see the 
figure), rather than a single covariation matrix — can further improve amino acid contact and distance predictions71.

Input data

Colour image

Input features to network

Network output

RGB intensities

(3 channels)

Pixel-level segmentation

(cat or no-cat)

R

G

B

Amino acid covariances
(400 channels of size NxN)

Residue–residue

contact probabilities

Multiple-sequence alignment

for target protein
*

*

*

*

K T L R G K G I T D E V F P S
K T L E G K A I T K K V W S R
K T L R G K F I A E E A A Q N
E I P E G W F I S K S C A P S
¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨
K T L E G K W V T K E V G P T

Protein length = N

N

N

AA

AC

AD

DK

N

covi,j(D,K)=Prob(D at i & K at j) -

Prob(D at i)*Prob(K at j)

N

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 687

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsdifferent N×N feature matrices, each corresponding to 
a defined pair of amino acids, with the value at position 
(i,j) in a given matrix being either the pair frequency or 
the covariance for the given amino acid pair at alignment 
positions i and j (see also Box 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1).  
The convolutional neural network is then tasked with 
integrating this massive set of features to identify spatial 
contacts, which it does by training on large sets of proteins 
of known structure and their associated contact maps and 
multiple-sequence alignments. The importance of incor-
porating machine learning in template-free modelling 
is highlighted by the top-performing CASP13 structure 
prediction methods, all of which rely on deep convolu-
tional neural networks for, variously, predicting residue 
contacts or distances, predicting backbone torsion angles 
and ranking the final models.

Protein design
Protein design is frequently referred to as the inverse 
protein-folding problem. Instead of searching for 
the lowest-energy conformation for a given protein 
sequence, the goal is to identify an amino acid sequence 
that will stabilize a desired protein conformation or bind-
ing interaction. Despite the reverse nature of the prob-
lem, the modelling tools needed for protein design are 
very similar to those needed for high-resolution struc-
ture prediction. It is critical to have an energy function 
to rank the relative favourability of different side-chain 
and backbone packing interactions, and it is necessary 
to have sampling protocols that can be used to search 
for low-energy sequences and protein conformations. 
Protein design efforts can be broadly divided into two 
categories. In template-based design, the sequence and 
structure of naturally evolved proteins are modified to 
achieve new functions. In de novo design, novel protein 
backbones and sequences are generated from scratch, 
guided by design requirements and physicochemical 
constraints. There are compelling reasons for pursuing 
each approach. De novo design provides a rigorous test 
of our understanding of protein structure and allows the 
creation of exceptionally stable proteins with sequences 
that are not restricted by evolutionary constraints that are 
irrelevant to the design goals7,72–74. Template-based design 
is well-suited to creating proteins with new functions, as 
the protein structure is predefined, and it is often possible 
to repurpose functional groups in the template75. Here 
we describe recent progress in both approaches with a 
focus on molecular-modelling strategies for generating 
novel protein backbones, complexes and functional sites.

De novo protein design
In most projects in de novo protein design, the researcher 
begins by choosing a protein fold or topology to con-
struct. In some cases, a particular fold is chosen because 
there is interest in developing better understanding of 
that fold; in other cases, a fold is chosen because it will 
be a good starting point for instilling a particular func-
tion in the protein. For instance, β-barrel proteins can 
form binding pockets for small molecules inside the 
barrel. Once the desired protein fold is chosen, a model 
of the polypeptide backbone adopting the target fold is 
constructed. While a protein can potentially populate 

688 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

an enormous number of conformations for a given type 
of fold, only a small fraction of these conformations are 
consistent with forming a well-folded, thermodynami-
cally stable protein. Much of the recent work in the field 
of de novo protein design has been focused on develop-
ing improved methods for constructing protein back-
bones that are physically realizable, in that they allow 
tight packing between the amino acid side chains, satisfy 
the hydrogen-bonding potential of the protein backbone 
(primarily through secondary structure formation) and 
have little strain in the backbone torsion angles72.

As with protein structure prediction, one common 
approach for ensuring the favourability of structural 
elements local in the primary sequence is to assem-
ble the backbone from small fragments of naturally 
occurring proteins76 (Fig. 3). In addition to providing 
well-formed secondary structure, these fragments can 
encode structural motifs that are energetically favour-
able at the beginning and end of secondary structures. 
To create a backbone that adopts a desired tertiary fold, 
fragment-based folding algorithms are frequently com-
bined with user-defined distance constraints to specify 
how the secondary structural elements are positioned  
in 3D space77. This approach has been used to success-
fully design a variety of protein folds, including all heli-
cal proteins, repeat proteins, mixed α–β proteins and 
proteins consisting only of β-sheets and loops8,78–83. For 
some design projects, it may not be critical what tertiary 
fold the protein adopts, but instead, it may be important 
that the protein contain specific structural features that 
will allow it to perform a desired function. For example, 
it has been demonstrated that assembling proteins from 
naturally occurring helix–turn–helix fragments can be 
used to design large sets of alternative folds that contain 
features such as pockets and grooves that are frequently 
found in protein active sites84. Functional motifs such 
as metal-binding and protein interaction sites can also 
be explicitly incorporated into the assembly process85.

The process of constructing idealized folds from small 
protein fragments often reveals new information about 
the physical and structural constraints that dictate which 
conformations a protein can adopt. The first de novo 
design of an all-β-sheet protein that adopts a jellyroll 
fold (double-stranded β-helices formed by eight antipar-
allel β-strands)82 revealed strong couplings between 
loop geometry and loop length in the connections made 
between β-sheets. Similar rules have also been useful for 
designing the connections between secondary structural 
elements in mixed α–β proteins and α-helical proteins86,87.
Another approach that is used to generate back-
bones for de novo protein design is to build a mathe-
matical model that uses a small number of parameters to 
describe the structural variability typically observed for a 
type of protein fold. This approach has been particularly 
successful for the design of coiled-coil proteins, which 
consist of two or more α-helices supercoiled around a 
central axis. Using a mathematical (parametric) model 
for the coiled coil first described by Francis Crick88, 
protein designers can rapidly generate large sets of pro-
tein backbones in which each model deviates from the 
next in a systematic manner. For instance, it is typical to 
scan through alternative values for the supercoil radius 

www.nature.com/nrmReviewsDe novo protein design

Designing protein–protein interactions

Designing ligand-binding proteins

Small
fragments
of naturally
occurring
proteins 

Protein to
redesign

Target
protein

Stage 1:
Specify protein structure or complex

Fragment
assembly

Protein–protein
docking 

Protein to
redesign

Ligand

Ligand docking 

Stage 2:
Design amino acid sequence

Emphasize tightly packed
hydrophobic core 

Emphasize hydrogen
bonding and ensure
good hydrophobic
packing

Emphasize hydrogen
bonding and ensure
good hydrophobic
packing

Fig. 3 | Overview of the protein design process. Projects in computational protein design can be distilled down to  
two key steps. First, a model of the desired structure and/or complex needs to be created. For de novo design, this can  
be accomplished by piecing together fragments of naturally occurring proteins (left column). Designing complexes 
requires moving the proteins (middle column) and/or ligands (right column) relative to each other (frequently referred  
to as docking) so that their surfaces are adjacent. After a model of the protein fold or complex is created, sequence 
optimization simulations are used to find sequences that stabilize the desired fold or complex (bottom row).

(which determines the distance between helices) and the 
supercoil twist (which determines how tightly the helices 
wrap around each other). These studies have revealed 
that certain regions of parameter space allow for stronger 
interactions between the helices, which can be used to 
create proteins with exceptional stability89. Recent appli-
cations of parametric design include the de novo design 
of transmembrane proteins7,90 and α-helical barrels91. 
In an extension of this approach, a parametric model 
was constructed to describe the backbone geometry of 
β-barrel proteins8. Interestingly, this approach did not 
succeed, because it was discovered that it was necessary 
to include non-idealized kinks in the backbone to reduce 
torsional strain. In the end, backbone assembly from 
protein fragments was better suited to this problem and 
allowed the first de novo design of a β-barrel8.

Template-based design
For many design goals, it may not be necessary to use 
a de novo-designed protein backbone and sequence; 
instead, high-resolution structures of naturally occur-
ring proteins can serve as the starting point for the 
design process. This approach has frequently been used 
to design proteins that bind to other proteins, to design 
ligand-binding proteins and to design enzymes. Often it 
is not critical that a specific protein be used as the starting 
point for the design process, as the goal of the project is 
simply to create a protein that inhibits protein X or binds 
to ligand Y. In this case, it is advantageous to consider a 

large set of naturally occurring proteins as templates for 
design92,93. Each template will have unique binding pock-
ets and molecular surfaces that will make some templates 
more suitable than others for the design goal. Templates 
can be pre-screened to find proteins with binding pock-
ets of an appropriate size for the target ligand, but then 
it is usually necessary to perform design simulations 
with multiple templates to find structures that can form 
a tight binding interaction with the target molecule. 
Potential templates are also often pre-screened in order to 
select proteins that are stable and can be produced easily.  
In some projects it is useful or necessary to start with a 
specific template because it has functionality needed for 
the design goals. Perhaps the starting protein is an enzyme 
that catalyses a target reaction or an antibody that activates 
an important cell surface receptor. The design goal in these 
cases is typically to improve the biophysical properties of 
the protein or to perturb activity in a specific way.

Optimizing the protein sequence
Once a model or set of models for the protein back-
bone has been generated, through either de novo or 
template-based methods, the next step in the design pro-
cess is to identify an amino acid sequence that will stabi-
lize the desired conformation or binding event. Sequence 
optimization software includes two key components: an 
energy function to evaluate the favourability of a particu-
lar sequence, and a protocol to search for more favourable 
sequences. Since the same physical properties need to be 

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 689

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsoptimized in high-resolution structure prediction and 
protein design (side-chain packing, hydrogen bonding, 
hydrophobic burial, backbone and side-chain strain), 
similar energy functions are frequently used for design 
and refinement94–96. The energy functions are typically 
parameterized using a variety of benchmarks that focus 
on reproducing the sequence and structural features of 
naturally occurring proteins. One exciting recent develop-
ment is a demonstration that the energy functions for 
protein design and protein modelling can be improved 
by optimizing the energy function simultaneously with 
small-molecule thermodynamic data and high-resolution 
macromolecular structure data4. For instance, training the 
energy function to predict the experimentally measured 
free-energy changes associated with moving different 
chemical groups from the water phase to the vapour phase 
allows for more accurate modelling of the costs and bene-
fits of burying hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups in a 
protein. This approach led to improved results in tradi-
tional protein design benchmarks such as native-sequence 
recovery (an approach that aims to produce native-like 
sequences when redesigning naturally occurring proteins) 
and prediction of free-energy changes by mutation, as well 
as improvements in structure prediction.

The second component of a design simulation is the 
search for lower-energy sequences and side-chain con-
formations. A variety of methods have been developed 
for this problem, including deterministic approaches 
such as dead-end elimination and mean-field optimization, as 
well as stochastic approaches such as simulated annealing 
and  genetic  algorithms97.  Most  methods  simplify 
the side-chain optimization problem by restricting 
side-chain motion to a set of commonly observed con-
formations (or rotamers) observed in high-resolution 
structures from the PDB98. The design software Rosetta 
uses Monte Carlo sampling with simulated annealing to 
identify low-energy sequences and rotamers99. Starting 
from a random sequence, the Rosetta protocol accepts 
or rejects single amino acid mutations or rotamer sub-
stitutions on the basis of the Metropolis criterion (mean-
ing that mutations that lower the energy of the system 
are accepted, and mutations that raise the energy of  
the system are accepted at some probability dictated by the  
energy change and the temperature of the simulation; 
see also Box 1). Despite the simplicity of this approach, 
independent simulations that start with different ran-
dom sequences converge on similar sequences, and 
one strength of the method is that it is rapid (typically  
<10 minutes on a single processor for proteins of less than 
200 residues). One limitation of stochastic approaches  
like simulated annealing is that they do not guaran-
tee that the lowest-energy sequence will be identified. 
For this reason, research teams have also developed 
approaches that can identify the lowest-energy sequence 
for a given protein backbone and rotamer library97,100. 
In addition to finding the lowest-energy sequence, the 
protein design package OSPREY has methods for rank 
ordering the lowest-energy sequences101.

One challenge in computational protein design is that 
the optimal amino acid sequence for a protein can be 
very sensitive to the precise 3D structure of the protein.  
In many cases, a small change in backbone conformation can  

lead to dramatic drops in protein energy and large changes 
to the most favourable sequence. These large changes in 
energy reflect the stiffness of chemical interactions — very 
small displacements (<1 Å) in atomic coordinates can lead  
to strong steric repulsion or loss of a favourable inter-
action such as a hydrogen bond (Fig. 1b). To account for this  
rugged energy landscape, protein designers have devel-
oped a variety of methods for performing backbone sam-
pling along with sequence optimization102. One approach 
that has worked well when designing de novo proteins 
is to iterate between rotamer-based sequence optimiza-
tion and gradient-based minimization of torsion angles 
(backbone and side chain)72,77 (see also Box 1). With this 
approach, it is possible to simultaneously optimize angles 
throughout the entire structure. An alternative approach 
is to couple discrete changes in the conformation of the 
protein backbone with side-chain rotamer substitutions. 
These coupled moves allow the backbone to adjust to an 
amino acid substitution before scoring the favourability 
of the change103,104.

Because energy calculations based on all-atom models 
of proteins are hypersensititve to small changes in back-
bone conformation, and because the energy functions 
used for scoring protein conformations are empirical 
models that do not fully capture all the phenomena that 
contribute to the energy of a protein, knowledge-based 
approaches for sequence design that do not rely on explicit 
modelling of the amino acid side chains have also been 
developed105,106. In one approach, the protein is divided 
into sets of spatially adjacent residues and then the 
PDB is searched for residues that are in a similar struc-
tural environ ment (called tertiary structural motifs, or 
TERMS)105. The sequence preferences from the PDB for 
each residue position in a TERM are then used to derive an 
energy function that is used for sequence optimization106. 
Despite using naturally occurring proteins to derive the 
sequence preferences, this approach will likely also work 
for de novo protein design, in that a limited number of 
TERMS (hundreds) are able to describe most of the local 
structural environments observed in natural proteins105.

Many design scenarios benefit from specialized 
sequence optimization schemes. For instance, using step-
wise rotamer optimization for designing buried hydro-
gen bond networks — which are particularly important 
for protein–ligand and protein–protein interactions 
— is a difficult task, as the network is not energeti-
cally favourable until all polar groups have a hydrogen 
bonding partner. In other words, obtaining a sequence 
with a fully connected network from a sequence with 
no hydrogen bond network requires that the sequence 
optimization simulation pass through intermediate 
sequences with high energies. To address this issue, 
a side-chain sampling protocol that uses a graphical 
representation of potential hydrogen bond partners 
was developed to enumerate all possible side-chain 
hydrogen bond networks for an input backbone struc-
ture107–109. This method allowed the design of helical 
oligomers with large numbers of buried polar amino 
acids and high binding specificities between the protein 
chains. Creating networks like these will be essential for 
designing new enzymes, because active site residues are 
frequently supported by extensive hydrogen bonding. 

Dead-end elimination
An algorithm for side-chain 
rotamer optimization that 
functions by eliminating 
rotamers that are not 
compatible with adopting  
the sequence with the lowest 
possible energy.

Mean-field optimization
A protocol for designing 
sequences that assigns a 
probability to observing each 
amino acid at each sequence 
position in the protein and 
calculates an average 
(mean-field) energy for the 
protein based on the assigned 
probabilities. The probabilities 
are then adjusted to lower  
the mean-field energy  
of the protein.

Simulated annealing
A probabilistic approach  
for identifying low-energy 
sequences that accepts or 
rejects sequence changes on 
the basis of the calculated 
change in the energy of the 
protein when a sequence 
change is made and the 
temperature of the modelled 
system. if a change lowers the 
energy of the protein, it is 
automatically accepted;  
if it raises the energy of the 
system, it is accepted with 
some probability that depends 
on how much the energy has 
increased (a bigger increase  
in energy is less likely to be 
accepted) and the current 
temperature (at higher 
temperatures it is more 
likely to accept changes that 
raise the energy of the system).  
The temperature is lowered  
as the simulation progresses, to 
identify low-energy sequences.

Genetic algorithms
A sequence optimization 
protocol that repeatedly 
modifies a population of 
sequences by applying rounds 
of energy-based selection.  
The energy of a sequence is 
calculated by modelling it  
in the desired protein 
conformation. Lower-energy 
sequences are more likely  
to progress to the next 
generation. Before each round 
of selection, the previous 
winning sequences are 
recombined with each other 
and small numbers of 
mutations are incorporated 
into the sequences, to search 
for lower-energy sequences.

690 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

www.nature.com/nrmReviewsMulti-state design 
algorithms
An approach to designing 
sequences that satisfy multiple 
constraints simultaneously.  
For instance, such algorithms 
can be used to find protein 
sequences that are predicted 
to bind ligand x but not ligand Y. 
Alternatively, they can be 
repurposed to find sequences 
that are simultaneously good 
at binding both ligand x and 
ligand Y.

Yeast surface display
An experimental approach  
for probing a large library of 
protein sequences (up to tens 
of millions) for binding to 
another molecule. in the final 
yeast library, each yeast cell 
contains the DNA for one 
member of the protein library, 
and this protein is expressed 
as a fusion protein that 
presents the protein on the 
outside of the cell. The cells are 
mixed with the target molecule, 
which has been labelled with  
a fluorescent dye, and then 
fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting is used to identify the 
cells that contain a designed 
protein that binds the target 
protein. DNA sequencing is 
used to identify the designs 
that passed selection.

BCL-2 protein family
A family of structurally related 
proteins that interact with each 
other to induce or repress 
apoptosis.

Another frequent design problem is the desire to favour  
one binding interaction (referred to as positive design) over  
another binding interaction (referred to as negative design).  
To perform simultaneous positive and negative design, 
multi-state design algorithms have been developed that 
evaluate amino acid sequences on alternative con-
formations and explicitly search for sequences that will 
increase the energy gap between the two states110–114.

Validating computational predictions
The most exciting and nerve-wracking moment in a 
protein design project is when experimental validation 
is performed. Various experiments are typically used to  
characterize designed proteins, including stability analy-
sis with denaturation experiments, measurement of 
oligomerization state, high-resolution structure deter-
mination, and functional assays, when appropriate. For 
many design goals, it is necessary to experimentally 
characterize a set of alternative designs to identify a small 
number of successful designs. The number of designs 
that need to be characterized can vary widely, depending 
on the design goal. Methods for stabilizing proteins (see 
also below) have progressed to the point that often only 
a handful of designs need to be characterized115, while 
more challenging problems, such as redesigning the sur-
face of a protein to bind another protein, may require 
screening of thousands of alternative sequences. It is 
common in a protein design project to progress through 
multiple generations of designs, modifying the design 
and/or computational strategy with each generation.  
In this way, it is possible to learn about the minimal 
structural features needed to accomplish the design goal.  
In one excellent example of this process, a high-throughput  
screening strategy based on yeast surface display was 
combined with next-generation sequencing to simul-
taneously evaluate thousands of de novo-designed pro-
teins116. Iterative rounds of adjusting the design protocol 
and screening resulted in a pipeline that more robustly 
produced folded proteins.

applications of protein design
One of the great promises of computational protein 
design is that it will allow the creation of new proteins 
that have valuable applications in medicine, industry 
and research. Over the past 10 years, this promise has 
started to be realized117. This progress is being ena-
bled by improved computational methods as well as 
by advances in DNA synthesis and sequencing118. It is 
now affordable to order large sets of computationally 
designed sequences, allowing protein designers to rap-
idly explore multiple solutions to a problem. To give 
a flavour of the types of problems that computational 
protein design can be applied to, we highlight a subset  
of protein-engineering projects from the past few years that  
have made use of molecular modelling as an important 
step in the design process.

Stabilizing proteins
There is a long-standing interest in using computer-based 
methods to identify mutations that will increase the 
thermo dynamic stability of proteins119–122, as this often 
results in higher expression levels of recombinant protein 

and can reduce the propensity to aggregate. It has been 
apparent for many years that naturally occurring proteins 
are often not optimized for stability, and that a global 
redesign (a simulation in which all residues in the protein 
are allowed to mutate) of a protein can raise the thermal 
unfolding temperature dramatically, by over 30 °C in 
some cases123,124. In most real-world applications, how-
ever, it is preferred to raise stability by making a more 
selective set of mutations. One approach that is proving 
to be well suited to this task is to combine information 
from computational design simulations with sequence 
preferences in a multiple-sequence alignment generated 
by identifying homologues of the protein of interest in 
the NCBI non-redundant protein database125. Many 
groups have demonstrated that replacing an amino acid 
that is poorly represented in a multiple-sequence align-
ment with the most preferred amino acid at that position 
can often raise protein stability120,126. To reduce false posi-
tives in this type of prediction and identify mutations 
that are most likely to dramatically improve stability, it 
is possible to use information from multiple-sequence 
alignments along with Rosetta design simulations115.  
In a striking demonstration of this approach, a one-step 
design process was sufficient to identify 18 mutations 
that raise the thermal tolerance of the malaria inva-
sion protein RH5 by over 15 °C, while retaining the 
ligand-binding and immunogenic properties needed for 
vaccine development127 (Fig. 4a).

Controlling binding specificities
Modulating the specificity of protein interactions is a 
powerful approach for studying and redirecting cell sig-
nalling pathways128,129. Altered interaction interfaces can 
also be used to assemble novel molecular assemblies. In 
one demonstration of this capability, multi-state design 
simulations were used to redesign contacts between 
the heavy and light chains of antibodies to create anti-
body variants that would no longer interact with their 
wild-type counterparts130–132. These redesigns allowed 
the creation of bispecific antibodies in which one arm 
of an IgG-like antibody recognizes one antigen and the 
other arm recognizes a separate antigen. Antibodies of 
this type are useful therapeutically — for example, as 
a form of anti-cancer immunotherapy, when bispecific 
antibodies can recruit a patient’s T cells to their cancer 
cells133 (Fig. 4b). Another approach to manipulate the 
specificity of an interaction is to expand the interaction 
interface to design new contact sites for regions of the 
target protein that are not conserved between other 
potential binding partners. This approach was used to 
design novel, specific inhibitors for each of the six mem-
bers of the pro-survival BCL-2 protein family. This allowed 
the investigators to probe the role of each family member 
in pro-survival signalling in human cancer cell lines134.

De novo interface design
To design a novel interaction between two proteins, a 
model must first be created with the proteins brought 
near each other so that their surfaces are adjacent. The 
computational process of bringing the two proteins near 
each other is frequently referred to as docking. Once the 
proteins are adjacent, sequence optimization simulations 

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 691

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsa  Stabilizing a malaria invasion protein for use as a
    vaccine antigen  

b  Orthogonal interface design to generate bispeciﬁc antibodies
     for cancer immunotherapy

Thermostability
mutations  

l

d
e
d
o
f
n
u
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

 

Wild type

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

Mutant

0

20

40

60

80

Temperature (°C) 

Cancer cell

T cell 

Cell surface
receptor

Monospeciﬁc
antibodies

Recruitment of
T cells to cancer cells
Cancer
cell 

T cell 

Bispeciﬁc
antibody

Interface
design

Wild type 
Design

Altered speciﬁcity heavy 
chain–light chain interaction

Heterodimerization
of heavy chains

Presentation on the surface
of the nanoparticle for
efﬁcient immune response

c  De novo interface design to create nanoparticle vaccines for RSV

Homotrimer

1

Designed
interaction

Designed
interaction
surface

2

Heterodimer
self-assembly

Nanoparticle with

icosahedral symmetry

Viral F-glycoprotein

3

 Co-assembly with viral

fusion protein

Homopentamer

d  De novo-designed mimic of IL-2 with receptor speciﬁcity
     altered to reduce toxicity in anti-cancer treatment

e  Scaffolding of RSV epitope
     for vaccine design

f  De novo design of ligand-
    binding proteins
Fluorogenic
compound

Porphyrin

IL-2R

Wild-type IL-2

No longer binds
to IL-2R

IL-2 mimic

IL-2Rc

IL-2R

IL-2R

De novo
design
(unrelated
in topology
or amino
acid
sequence)

IL-2Rc

Neutralizing antibody against RSV
Conformational epitope from
RSV protein
Designed protein that presents
the RSV epitope
(three-helix bundle scaffold) 

Fluorescence-
activating -barrel

Porphyrin-binding
helical bundle 

Fig. 4 | Using computational design to create proteins that have valuable 
applications in research and medicine. a | Increasing protein stability. 
Energy calculations from protein design simulations were combined with 
sequence conservation information to identify 18 mutations that raise the 
thermostability of a malaria invasion protein by more than 15 °C, thereby 
improving its recombinant production for use as a vaccine immunogen127.  
b | Manipulating binding specificity. Redesign of interactions between 
antibody chains allowed the self-assembly of two unique light chains and 
two unique heavy chains into bispecific antibodies that can simultaneously 
bind two different antigens. These antibodies can be used for a variety of 
applications, including the recruitment of T cells to cancer cells as a form  
of immunotherapy130–132. c | Design of interaction interfaces. The design of 
an interaction between two homo-oligomers (orange trimer and blue 
pentamer ; step 1) induced self-assembly of a large protein cage (step 2) and 
allowed for multivalent display of an antigen from respiratory syncytial  

virus (RSV), thereby establishing a nanoparticle vaccine candidate138,142  
(step 3). This nanoparticle with the viral antigen on the surface induced 
neutralizing antibody responses that were ~10-fold higher than when the 
antigen was provided alone. d | De novo design of an interleukin mimic that 
binds to a subset of interleukin receptors, allowing the protein to maintain 
anti-cancer activity while reducing toxicity9. The designed protein maintains 
selected binding surfaces (shown in blue) in their naturally occurring 
orientations while embedding them in a new protein scaffold. e | De novo 
design of a protein scaffold that presents a conformational epitope from RSV. 
In vivo, this epitope-focused immunogen elicited antibodies that neutralize 
the virus, and currently is being tested as a vaccine172. f | De novo design 
strategies can also be used to design proteins optimized to bind certain 
ligands. For example, two custom-built backbones with different protein 
folds — a β-barrel and a helical bundle — were generated, respectively , to 
bind and activate a fluorescent ligand and to bind porphyrin8,158.

692 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

www.nature.com/nrmReviewscan be used to search for amino acids that will stabilize 
the interaction. Since many docked conformations may 
not be designable — for example, because the residues 
are not appropriately positioned to allow a high density 
of favourable interactions — it is important to consider 
large sets of alternatively docked complexes. One type of 
de novo interface design that has been particularly suc-
cessful is the creation of symmetrical homo-oligomers. 
There are several inherent advantages in this design 
approach: favourable interactions are replicated through 
symmetry; the degrees of freedom to sample during 
docking are reduced; and obligate homo-oligomers can 
be stabilized primarily with hydrophobic interactions 
at the interface, as the proteins do not need to be solu-
ble in the unbound form. In general, computational 
design methods have been more successful at designing 
nonpolar than polar interactions135. A striking exam-
ple of symmetrical oligomer design is a generation of 
self-assembling nanocages136–138 (Fig. 4c). These designs 
encompass complexes of homodimers or homotrimers  
with designed interfaces between the complexes to stabi-
lize formation of the nanocages. Importantly, only a 
single new interface needs to be designed to induce 
self-assembly into a cage. Exciting applications of this 
technology include de novo cages that package RNA, 
similar to viral capsids139, ordered presentation of small 
proteins for structure determination by cryo-EM140,141 
and display of viral antigens in nanoparticle vaccines142 
(Fig. 4c). Protein cages have also been designed using 
approaches that do not require the creation of novel 
protein–protein interfaces. Similar to how DNA base 
pairing can be used to assemble large macromolecular 
complexes (DNA origami), helices that form coiled-coil 
dimers can be used to drive the assembly of protein 
cages143, and engineering rigid linkers between naturally 
occurring homo-oligomers can be used to favour the for-
mation of symmetrical cages144. The design of symmetri-
cal interactions has also been used to engineer ordered, 
crystal-like lattices and proteins that polymerize into 2D 
sheets and filaments145–148.

One-sided interface design (in which only one of the 
protein partners is mutated) can be used to engineer pro-
teins that bind and regulate signalling proteins involved 
in disease. However, to date, computer-based one-sided 
interface design has proved more difficult than two- 
sided design. One-sided design often requires the design 
of more polar contacts, as the surface of the protein that 
is being targeted cannot be mutated and is likely to 
contain some polar amino acids. Successful one-sided 
designs have generally bound to surface-exposed hydro-
phobic patches on the target protein, as was the case in 
the design of a protein that binds and neutralizes the 
influenza virus149. Because one-sided interface design 
is so challenging, investigators have taken advantage 
of recent advances in DNA synthesis and yeast surface 
display to experimentally screen large numbers (tens of 
thousands) of computationally designed sequences to 
find tight, stable binders150.

One type of one-sided interface design that has been 
particularly elusive is the computer-based design of 
antibodies that bind tightly to defined surfaces on bind-
ing partners. This is a challenging problem because, in 

addition to designing interactions across the antibody– 
antigen interface, it is necessary to stabilize the anti-
body variable loops in a conformation that is favourable  
for binding; these loops can access a broad range of con-
formations, but during naturally occurring affinity 
maturation in antibodies, they typically evolve to adopt 
unique conformations151,152. There has been encouraging 
recent progress in using libraries of antibody loop con-
formations from the PDB153 to create stable antibodies 
with defined loop structure154, but there are no reports 
of de novo interfaces between a designed antibody 
and a binding partner that have been validated with a 
high-resolution structure.

Scaffolding protein binding sites
For some projects involving protein–ligand or protein– 
protein interactions, a structural and sequence motif that 
is favourable for binding is already known, but it would be 
useful to scaffold the binding motif within a well-folded  
protein. Scaffolding a motif can increase binding affinity 
by pre-ordering it in a binding-competent conformation 
and can improve the stability and solubility of the pro-
tein. The design of BCL-2 protein inhibitors described 
above is an example of this. In another example, mimics  
of the natural cytokines IL-2 and IL-15 were created that 
display binding surfaces for interacting with only a sub-
set of interleukin receptors9 (Fig. 4d). Selected helices 
from IL-2 that are important for binding the desired 
subset of interleukin receptors were incorporated into 
a de novo-designed protein in a way that kept the heli-
ces appropriately positioned to bind their receptors. 
Like naturally occurring IL-2, the designed protein 
has anti-cancer activity when used in mouse models  
of mela noma and colon cancer, but is less toxic to the mice. 
Motif grafting has also been used to display conforma-
tional epitopes for vaccine development. This approach 
has shown promise in eliciting response from naive  
B cells towards scaffolded antigens derived from HIV  
and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)155 (Fig. 4e). Of note,  
besides the increased immunogenicity desired for the 
generation of vaccines, protein design can also be used 
to make proteins less immunogenic. As an example, 
design simulations have been used to search for protein 
mutations that will maintain stability and activity but 
remove sequence motifs known to be good substrates 
for major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs)156.

Designed ligand binding and catalysis
Introducing new ligand and substrate binding sites into 
existing or de novo-designed proteins is of great interest, 
as this can be used to create new imaging reagents, cata-
lysts and sensors (Fig. 4f). In this type of design, amino 
acid side chains surrounding a pocket in the protein are 
varied so as to form favourable contacts with the desired 
ligand. In many cases a particular protein structure may 
not have residues appropriately positioned to form strong 
interactions with the desired ligand. To allow tighter 
contacts, the binding pocket can be adjusted with small 
changes to the protein backbone, or alternative proteins 
can be considered as the starting point for design92,157. 
De novo design methods offer one strategy for creating 
a set of protein structures that can be computationally 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 693

DNA origami
A term describing approaches 
that use the high sequence 
specificity of DNA interactions 
to design DNA sequences  
that will fold into complex  
and predictable two- and 
three-dimensional shapes.

Major histocompatibility 
complexes
(MHCs). A set of cell surface 
proteins that bind to antigens 
from foreign pathogens and 
present them for recognition 
by other proteins and cells 
from the immune system.  
They are a key component of 
the acquired immune system.

 

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviewsscreened for favourable binding pockets81,158. In one 
recent study, a set of de novo-designed β-barrels were 
used to bind a fluorescent molecule in a conformation 
that enhances fluorescence emission and can be used for 
imaging in cells8. Binding-site design can also be used 
to predict mutations that will lead to resistance against 
therapeutics159.

The de novo design of catalysts is especially challeng-
ing, as the enzyme must not only bind the substrate but 
also stabilize the transition state and release the final 
product. Computational methods have been devel-
oped for rapidly scanning a set of protein structures to  
find constellations of residues properly positioned  
to build an enzyme active site160. Once the key catalytic 
residues are in place, further side-chain design is per-
formed on residues surrounding the catalytic resi dues 
(second shell) to stabilize the catalytic residues in the 
desired conformations. This approach has achieved 
modest success, but rationally designed enzymes have 
so far not achieved catalytic proficiencies comparable to 
those of naturally occurring enzymes161. It is not estab-
lished whether this poor performance occurs because 
the current methods cannot place and/or stabilize 
active-site residues with enough precision (perhaps 
they need to be designed with sub-ångstrom accuracy, 
whereas many computational designs are only accurate 
to within 1 or 2 Å) or because efficient enzymes incor-
porate many other features, such as mechanisms for 
the substrate and product to rapidly enter and exit the  
binding site.

Design of protein switches
One important property of proteins is that they fre-
quently switch between alternative conformations. This 
switching is integral to a variety of protein functions, 
including signal transduction, molecular motors and 
catalysis. Multi-state design simulations can be used to 
search for sequences that have low energies when adopt-
ing alternative backbone conformations. This approach 
has been used to design a small protein that can switch 
between alternative folds, and to design a transmem-
brane protein that rocks between alternative conforma-
tions to transport metals across a membrane162,163. In an 
extension of this strategy, multi-state design was used 
to introduce conformational transitions occurring at 
functionally relevant timescales (milliseconds) into an 
existing bacterial protein164. Molecular modelling can 
also be used to aid the design of chimeric proteins that 
combine naturally occurring conformational switches 
with functional motifs. This strategy has been used to 
create photoactivatable proteins for controlling oligo-
merization and catalysis in living cells165–167. Protein 
design software can also be used to inform the place-
ment of photoactivatable chemical groups in proteins to 
control conformational switching168,169.

conclusions and perspective
Tools for protein structure prediction and design have 
advanced considerably in the past decade, but many 
challenges remain. The energy functions that guide 
prediction and design — necessarily approximate, for 
reasons of computational efficiency — still struggle to 

694 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

accurately balance polar and nonpolar interactions and 
solvation effects, particularly at interfaces. As a result, 
the success rates for interface-modelling applications, 
such as protein docking with backbone flexibility, 
one-sided interface design and enzyme design, remain 
low. Hybrid approaches that explicitly model a subset 
of ‘structurally important’ ordered water molecules 
making key interactions with the modelled protein 
surface represent one promising avenue forwards, but 
these remain challenging to parameterize due to their 
computational cost and the need to balance interac-
tions with explicit waters and with bulk water being 
modelled implicitly. Loop-mediated interactions such 
as those between T cell receptors and peptide–MHC or 
antibodies and antigens also remain difficult to predict 
and engineer. Here, the challenges of interface energet-
ics are compounded by the need to accurately model 
the conformational preferences of irregular polypeptide 
segments that may sample an ensemble of structures 
in the unbound state. More broadly, new approaches 
are needed to robustly predict and design the protein 
conformational flexibility and motion that are often 
critical for protein function. Approaches that combine 
molecular-dynamics trajectories with analysis of energy 
landscapes may be required to capture the dynamic 
aspects of these flexible systems.

In spite of these challenges, we believe that protein 
prediction and design approaches, as they continue to 
mature, are poised to have an increasingly important 
role in biology and medicine. One remarkable feature 
of naturally occurring proteins is that, to fulfil their role 
in the cell, they are often involved in multiple activities 
and binding reactions. For instance, Rho family GTPases 
catalyse the hydrolysis of GTP, undergo well-defined 
conformational  changes,  bind  to  multiple  down-
stream signalling proteins and are regulated by gua-
nine exchange factors and guanine-activating proteins. 
We anticipate that by combining directed-evolution 
approaches with advances in molecular modelling, the 
design of proteins with similar complexity will soon be 
in reach and will enable a variety of exciting applica-
tions. For instance, de novo-designed protein cages are 
likely to be useful in vaccine development as scaffolds 
for computationally designed immunogens142, and in 
cancer therapy as ‘smart’ drug delivery vehicles capable 
of integrating multiple targeting cues (for example, aber-
rant cell-surface protein expression or MHC-presented 
neo-epitopes). Engineering control mechanisms into 
proteins (ligand binding, light activation, enzyme activa-
tion, etc.) should allow the design of therapeutics that are 
active only in a particular environment and that reduce 
toxic side effects.

As the protein structure databases continue to grow, 
the availability of new sets of protein backbones and 
side-chain packing arrangements will increase, open-
ing up possibilities to repurpose them to create novel 
binding sites and functions. It will also be exciting to see 
whether machine learning and pattern recognition can 
advance the field of protein design, just as they are doing 
for structure prediction.

Published online 15 August 2019

www.nature.com/nrmReviews1. 

Jones, D. T., Singh, T., Kosciolek, T. & Tetchner, S. 
MetaPSICOV: combining coevolution methods for 
accurate prediction of contacts and long range 
hydrogen bonding in proteins. Bioinformatics 31, 
999–1006 (2015).

2.  Wang, S., Sun, S., Li, Z., Zhang, R. & Xu, J.  

Accurate de novo prediction of protein contact  
map by ultra-deep learning model. PLoS Comput. Biol. 
13, e1005324 (2017).  
This paper presents an accurate deep learning 
method that predicts residue–residue contacts by 
integrating 1D sequence features with 2D residue 
covariation and pairwise interaction features.

3.  Huang, J. et al. CHARMM36m: an improved force 

field for folded and intrinsically disordered proteins. 
Nat. Methods 14, 71–73 (2017).

4.  Park, H. et al. Simultaneous optimization of 

biomolecular energy functions on features from small 
molecules and macromolecules. J. Chem. Theory 
Comput. 12, 6201–6212 (2016).

5.  Heo, L. & Feig, M. Experimental accuracy in protein 

structure refinement via molecular dynamics 
simulations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 
13276–13281 (2018).

6.  Park, H., Ovchinnikov, S., Kim, D. E., DiMaio, F. & 
Baker, D. Protein homology model refinement by 
large-scale energy optimization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 115, 3054–3059 (2018).  
Heo et al. and Park et al. report substantial 
progress in refinement of protein structure models 
by physics-based simulations.

7.  Mravic, M. et al. Packing of apolar side chains enables 

accurate design of highly stable membrane proteins. 
Science 363, 1418–1423 (2019).  
This study reports on the design of helical 
membrane proteins with only apolar interactions 
between side chains, which demonstrates that 
hydrogen bonding between helices is not required 
for the folding and stability of membrane proteins.
8.  Dou, J. et al. De novo design of a fluorescence-activating 

β-barrel. Nature 561, 485–491 (2018).  
The first de novo design of a functional β-barrel 
protein, which reveals that symmetry breaking 
within the barrel is required to eliminate backbone 
strain and maximize hydrogen bonding between 
β-strands.
Silva, D.-A. et al. De novo design of potent and 
selective mimics of IL-2 and IL-15. Nature 565, 
186–191 (2019).

9. 

10.  Chen, I.-M. A. et al. IMG/M: integrated genome and 

metagenome comparative data analysis system. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D507–D516 (2017).
11.  Berman, H. M. et al. The protein data bank.  

Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235–242 (2000).

12.  LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. 

Nature 521, 436–444 (2015).

13.  Anson, M. L. & Mirsky, A. E. Protein coagulation  

and its reversal: the preparation of insoluble globin, 
soluble globin and heme. J. Gen. Physiol. 13, 
469–476 (1930).

14.  Lumry, R. & Eyring, H. Conformation changes of 

proteins. J. Phys. Chem. 58, 110–120 (1954).

15.  Anfinsen, C. B., Haber, E., Sela, M. & White, F. H. Jr 

The kinetics of formation of native ribonuclease during 
oxidation of the reduced polypeptide chain. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 47, 1309–1314 (1961).

16.  Anfinsen, C. B. Principles that govern the folding of 

protein chains. Science 181, 223–230 (1973).

17.  Anfinsen, C. B. & Scheraga, H. A. Experimental and 

theoretical aspects of protein folding. Adv. Protein 
Chem. 29, 205–300 (1975).

18.  Lazaridis, T. & Karplus, M. Effective energy functions 

for protein structure prediction. Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 10, 139–145 (2000).

19.  Dill, K. A., Ozkan, S. B., Shell, M. S. & Weikl, T. R.  
The protein folding problem. Annu. Rev. Biophys.  
37, 289–316 (2008).

20.  Karplus, M. The levinthal paradox: yesterday and 

today. Fold. Des. 2, S69–75 (1997).

21.  Levitt, M. & Warshel, A. Computer simulation of 
protein folding. Nature 253, 694–698 (1975).
22.  Levinthal, C. How to fold graciously. Mossbauer 

Spectrosc. Biol. Syst. 67, 22–24 (1969).

23.  Bryngelson, J. D., Onuchic, J. N., Socci, N. D. & 

Wolynes, P. G. Funnels, pathways, and the energy 
landscape of protein folding: a synthesis. Proteins 21, 
167–195 (1995).

24.  Dill, K. A. Dominant forces in protein folding. 

Biochemistry 29, 7133–7155 (1990).

25.  Monticelli, L. et al. The MARTINI coarse-grained force 
field: extension to proteins. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
4, 819–834 (2008).

26.  Tozzini, V. Coarse-grained models for proteins.  
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 15, 144–150 (2005).

27.  Maisuradze, G. G., Senet, P., Czaplewski, C., Liwo, A.  
& Scheraga, H. A. Investigation of protein folding by 
coarse-grained molecular dynamics with the UNRES 
force field. J. Phys. Chem. A 114, 4471–4485 (2010).

28.  Altschul, S. F. et al. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:  

a new generation of protein database search programs. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 3389–3402 (1997).

29.  Eddy, S. R. Profile hidden Markov models. 

Bioinformatics 14, 755–763 (1998).

30.  Remmert, M., Biegert, A., Hauser, A. & Söding, J. 
HHblits: lightning-fast iterative protein sequence 
searching by HMM-HMM alignment. Nat. Methods  
9, 173–175 (2011).

31.  Sadreyev, R. & Grishin, N. COMPASS: a tool for 
comparison of multiple protein alignments with 
assessment of statistical significance. J. Mol. Biol. 
326, 317–336 (2003).

32.  Söding, J. Protein homology detection by HMM–
HMM comparison. Bioinformatics 21, 951–960 
(2005).

33.  Bowie, J. U., Lüthy, R. & Eisenberg, D. A method  

to identify protein sequences that fold into a known 
three-dimensional structure. Science 253, 164–170 
(1991).

34.  Jones, D. T., Taylor, W. R. & Thornton, J. M. A new 
approach to protein fold recognition. Nature 358, 
86–89 (1992).

35.  Waterhouse, A. et al. SWISS-MODEL: homology 
modelling of protein structures and complexes. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 46, W296–W303 (2018).

36.  Krivov, G. G., Shapovalov, M. V. & Dunbrack, R. L. 

Improved prediction of protein side-chain 
conformations with SCWRL4. Proteins: Struct. Funct. 
Bioinf. 77, 778–795 (2009).

37.  Webb, B. & Sali, A. Protein structure modeling with 

MODELLER. Methods Mol. Biol. 1654, 39–54 
(2017).

38.  Yang, J. et al. The I-TASSER Suite: protein structure 

and function prediction. Nat. Methods 12, 7–8 
(2015).

39.  Song, Y. et al. High-resolution comparative modeling 
with RosettaCM. Structure 21, 1735–1742 (2013).

40.  Ovchinnikov, S. et al. Protein structure determination 

using metagenome sequence data. Science 355, 
294–298 (2017).  
This study shows that inclusion of sequence data 
from metagenomics triples the number of protein 
families for which accurate structural models can 
be built using folding simulations that incorporate 
covariation-derived residue–residue contact 
predictions.

41.  Jones, D. T. & McGuffin, L. J. Assembling novel protein 

folds from super-secondary structural fragments. 
Proteins 53, 480–485 (2003).

42.  Simons, K. T., Kooperberg, C., Huang, E. & Baker, D. 

Assembly of protein tertiary structures from fragments 
with similar local sequences using simulated annealing 
and Bayesian scoring functions. J. Mol. Biol. 268, 
209–225 (1997).

43.  Xu, D. & Zhang, Y. Ab initio protein structure assembly 

using continuous structure fragments and optimized 
knowledge-based force field. Proteins 80, 1715–1735 
(2012).

44.  Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A. W., Rosenbluth, M. N., 

Teller, A. H. & Teller, E. Equation of state calculations 
by fast computing machines. J. Chem. Phys. 21, 
1087–1092 (1953).

45.  Jones, T. A. & Thirup, S. Using known substructures in 
protein model building and crystallography. EMBO J. 
5, 819–822 (1986).

46.  Baeten, L. et al. Reconstruction of protein backbones 

from the BriX collection of canonical protein 
fragments. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000083 (2008).

47.  Bystroff, C., Simons, K. T., Han, K. F. & Baker, D.  

Local sequence–structure correlations in proteins. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 7, 417–421 (1996).

48.  Bujnicki, J. M. Protein-structure prediction by 

recombination of fragments. Chembiochem. 7, 19–27 
(2006).

49.  Leaver-Fay, A. et al. ROSETTA3: an object-oriented 

software suite for the simulation and design of 
macromolecules. Methods Enzymol. 487, 545–574 
(2011).

50.  Moult, J., Pedersen, J. T., Judson, R. & Fidelis, K. A 
large-scale experiment to assess protein structure 
prediction methods. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Bioinf. 
23, ii–iv (1995).

51.  Atchley, W. R., Wollenberg, K. R., Fitch, W. M., 

Terhalle, W. & Dress, A. W. Correlations among amino 
acid sites in bHLH protein domains: an information 

theoretic analysis. Mol. Biol. Evol. 17, 164–178 
(2000).

52.  Fodor, A. A. & Aldrich, R. W. Influence of conservation 

on calculations of amino acid covariance in multiple 
sequence alignments. Proteins 56, 211–221 (2004).
53.  Weigt, M., White, R. A., Szurmant, H., Hoch, J. A. & 

Hwa, T. Identification of direct residue contacts in 
protein-protein interaction by message passing. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 67–72 (2009).

54.  Morcos, F. et al. Direct-coupling analysis of residue 
coevolution captures native contacts across many 
protein families. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 
E1293–301 (2011).

55.  Balakrishnan, S., Kamisetty, H., Carbonell, J. G.,  
Lee, S.-I. & Langmead, C. J. Learning generative 
models for protein fold families. Proteins 79, 
1061–1078 (2011).

56.  Jones, D. T., Buchan, D. W. A., Cozzetto, D. & Pontil, M. 

PSICOV: precise structural contact prediction using 
sparse inverse covariance estimation on large multiple 
sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 28, 184–190 
(2012).

57.  Nugent, T. & Jones, D. T. Accurate de novo structure 
prediction of large transmembrane protein domains 
using fragment-assembly and correlated mutation 
analysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 
E1540–E1547 (2012).

58.  Ovchinnikov, S. et al. Large-scale determination  

of previously unsolved protein structures using 
evolutionary information. eLife 4, e09248 (2015).

59.  Zhang, C., Mortuza, S. M., He, B., Wang, Y. & Zhang, Y. 

Template-based and free modeling of I-TASSER and 
QUARK pipelines using predicted contact maps in 
CASP12. Proteins 86, 136–151 (2018).

60.  Marks, D. S. et al. Protein 3D structure computed 

from evolutionary sequence variation. PLoS ONE 6, 
e28766 (2011).

61.  Brünger, A. T. et al. Crystallography & NMR system:  

a new software suite for macromolecular structure 
determination. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 
54, 905–921 (1998).

62.  Hopf, T. A. et al. Three-dimensional structures of 

membrane proteins from genomic sequencing. Cell 
149, 1607–1621 (2012).

63.  Toth-Petroczy, A. et al. Structured states of disordered 

proteins from genomic sequences. Cell 167, 
158–170.e12 (2016).

64.  Cheng, J., Randall, A. Z., Sweredoski, M. J. & Baldi, P. 

SCRATCH: a protein structure and structural feature 
prediction server. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, W72–W76 
(2005).

65.  Shen, Y. & Bax, A. Protein backbone and sidechain 
torsion angles predicted from NMR chemical shifts 
using artificial neural networks. J. Biomol. NMR 56, 
227–241 (2013).

66.  Faraggi, E., Zhang, T., Yang, Y., Kurgan, L. & Zhou, Y. 

SPINE X: improving protein secondary structure 
prediction by multistep learning coupled with prediction 
of solvent accessible surface area and backbone  
torsion angles. J. Comput. Chem. 33, 259–267 
(2012).

67.  Jones, D. T. Protein secondary structure prediction 
based on position-specific scoring matrices. J. Mol. 
Biol. 292, 195–202 (1999).

68.  Karplus, K. SAM-T08, HMM-based protein structure 

prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, W492–W497 
(2009).

69.  Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. Imagenet 

classification with deep convolutional neural networks. 
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25, 1097–1105 
(2012).

70.  Liu, Y., Palmedo, P., Ye, Q., Berger, B. & Peng, J. 

Enhancing evolutionary couplings with deep 
convolutional neural networks. Cell Syst. 6, 65–74.e3 
(2018).

71.  Jones, D. T. & Kandathil, S. M. High precision in 

protein contact prediction using fully convolutional 
neural networks and minimal sequence features. 
Bioinformatics 34, 3308–3315 (2018).

72.  Huang, P.-S., Boyken, S. E. & Baker, D. The coming of 
age of de novo protein design. Nature 537, 320–327 
(2016).

73.  Khoury, G. A., Smadbeck, J., Kieslich, C. A.  

& Floudas, C. A. Protein folding and de novo  
protein design for biotechnological applications. 
Trends Biotechnol. 32, 99–109 (2014).

74.  Woolfson, D. N. et al. De novo protein design: how do 

we expand into the universe of possible protein 
structures? Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 33, 16–26 
(2015).

75.  Coluzza, I. Computational protein design: a review.  

J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 143001 (2017).

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 695

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviews76.  Mackenzie, C. O. & Grigoryan, G. Protein structural 
motifs in prediction and design. Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 44, 161–167 (2017).

77.  Kuhlman, B. et al. Design of a novel globular protein 

fold with atomic-level accuracy. Science 302, 
1364–1368 (2003).

78.  Brunette, T. J. et al. Exploring the repeat protein 
universe through computational protein design. 
Nature 528, 580–584 (2015).

79.  Huang, P.-S. et al. De novo design of a four-fold 
symmetric TIM-barrel protein with atomic-level 
accuracy. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 29–34 (2016).

80.  Doyle, L. et al. Rational design of α-helical tandem 

repeat proteins with closed architectures. Nature 528, 
585–588 (2015).  
First de novo design of repeat proteins that adopt 
‘doughnut’-like structures with the N and C termini 
adjacent in three-dimensional space.

81.  Marcos, E. et al. Principles for designing proteins  

with cavities formed by curved β sheets. Science 355, 
201–206 (2017).

82.  Marcos, E. et al. De novo design of a non-local β-sheet 

protein with high stability and accuracy. Nat. Struct. 
Mol. Biol. 25, 1028–1034 (2018).

83.  Murphy, G. S. et al. Computational de novo design of a 
four-helix bundle protein–DND_4HB. Protein Sci. 24, 
434–445 (2015).

84.  Jacobs, T. M. et al. Design of structurally distinct 

proteins using strategies inspired by evolution. 
Science 352, 687–690 (2016).

85.  Guffy, S. L., Teets, F. D., Langlois, M. I. & Kuhlman, B. 
Protocols for requirement-driven protein design in the 
Rosetta modeling program. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 58, 
895–901 (2018).

86.  Lin, Y.-R. et al. Control over overall shape and size in 
de novo designed proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
112, E5478–85 (2015).

87.  Koga, N. et al. Principles for designing ideal protein 

structures. Nature 491, 222–227 (2012).

88.  Crick, F. H. C. The Fourier transform of a coiled-coil. 

Acta Crystallogr. 6, 685–689 (1953).

89.  Huang, P.-S. et al. High thermodynamic stability of 

parametrically designed helical bundles. Science 346, 
481–485 (2014).

90.  Lu, P. et al. Accurate computational design of 

multipass transmembrane proteins. Science 359, 
1042–1046 (2018).

91.  Thomson, A. R. et al. Computational design of 

water-soluble α-helical barrels. Science 346, 
485–488 (2014).

92.  Tinberg, C. E. et al. Computational design of 
ligand-binding proteins with high affinity and 
selectivity. Nature 501, 212–216 (2013).

93.  Röthlisberger, D. et al. Kemp elimination catalysts by 

computational enzyme design. Nature 453, 190–195 
(2008).

94.  Alford, R. F. et al. The Rosetta all-atom energy function 

for macromolecular modeling and design. J. Chem. 
Theory Comput. 13, 3031–3048 (2017).

95.  Boas, F. E. & Harbury, P. B. Potential energy functions 

for protein design. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 17, 
199–204 (2007).

96.  O’Meara, M. J. et al. Combined covalent-electrostatic 

model of hydrogen bonding improves structure 
prediction with Rosetta. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 
609–622 (2015).

97.  Gainza, P., Nisonoff, H. M. & Donald, B. R. Algorithms 
for protein design. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 39, 16–26 
(2016).

98.  Dunbrack, R. L. Jr Rotamer libraries in the 21st 
century. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 431–440  
(2002).

99.  Kuhlman, B. & Baker, D. Native protein sequences are 
close to optimal for their structures. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 97, 10383–10388 (2000).

100. Traoré, S. et al. Fast search algorithms for 

computational protein design. J. Comput. Chem. 37, 
1048–1058 (2016).

101. Hallen, M. A. et al. OSPREY 3.0: open-source  

protein redesign for you, with powerful new features. 
J. Comput. Chem. 39, 2494–2507 (2018).
102. Lapidoth, G. et al. Highly active enzymes by 

automated combinatorial backbone assembly and 
sequence design. Nat. Commun. 9, 2780 (2018).

103. Ollikainen, N., de Jong, R. M. & Kortemme, T. 

Coupling protein side-chain and backbone flexibility 
improves the re-design of protein-ligand specificity. 
PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004335 (2015).

104. Hallen, M. A. & Donald, B. R. CATS (coordinates of 

atoms by taylor series): protein design with backbone 
flexibility in all locally feasible directions. 
Bioinformatics 33, i5–i12 (2017).

696 | NovemBeR 2019  | volume 20 

105. Mackenzie, C. O., Zhou, J. & Grigoryan, G. Tertiary 

alphabet for the observable protein structural 
universe. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 
E7438–E7447 (2016).

106. Frappier, V., Jenson, J. M., Zhou, J., Grigoryan, G.  
& Keating, A. E. Tertiary structural motif sequence 
statistics enable facile prediction and design of 
peptides that bind anti-apoptotic Bfl-1 and Mcl-1. 
Structure 27, 606–617 (2019).  
Instead of using an all-atom model of the complex 
to calculate interaction energies, Frappier et al. 
employed a knowledge-based approach with 
sequence preferences from structural motifs 
similar to the designed interface to predict binding 
energies.

107. Boyken, S. E. et al. De novo design of protein 
homo-oligomers with modular hydrogen-bond 
network-mediated specificity. Science 352, 680–687 
(2016).

108. Chen, Z. et al. Programmable design of orthogonal 

protein heterodimers. Nature 565, 106–111 (2019).
109. Maguire, J. B., Boyken, S. E., Baker, D. & Kuhlman, B. 

Rapid sampling of hydrogen bond networks for 
computational protein design. J. Chem. Theory 
Comput. 14, 2751–2760 (2018).

110.  Harbury, P. B., Plecs, J. J., Tidor, B., Alber, T. & Kim, P. S. 
High-resolution protein design with backbone freedom. 
Science 282, 1462–1467 (1998).

111.  Leaver-Fay, A., Jacak, R., Stranges, P. B. & Kuhlman, B. 

A generic program for multistate protein design.  
PLoS ONE 6, e20937 (2011).

112. Negron, C. & Keating, A. E. Multistate protein design 
using CLEVER and CLASSY. Methods Enzymol. 523, 
171–190 (2013).

113. Allen, B. D. & Mayo, S. L. An efficient algorithm  
for multistate protein design based on FASTER.  
J. Comput. Chem. 31, 904–916 (2010).

114. Löffler, P., Schmitz, S., Hupfeld, E., Sterner, R.  

& Merkl, R. Rosetta:MSF: a modular framework  
for multi-state computational protein design.  
PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005600 (2017).

115. Goldenzweig, A. et al. Automated structure- and 

sequence-based design of proteins for high bacterial 
expression and stability. Mol. Cell 63, 337–346 
(2016).  
This study uses protein design simulations coupled 
with sequence conservation information to create 
an effective protocol for identifying sets of 
mutations that increase protein thermostability 
and expression.

116. Rocklin, G. J. et al. Global analysis of protein folding 

using massively parallel design, synthesis, and testing. 
Science 357, 168–175 (2017).

117. Gainza-Cirauqui, P. & Correia, B. E. Computational 

protein design — the next generation tool to expand 
synthetic biology applications. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
52, 145–152 (2018).

118. Wrenbeck, E. E., Faber, M. S. & Whitehead, T. A. Deep 

sequencing methods for protein engineering and 
design. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 45, 36–44 (2017).
119. Malakauskas, S. M. & Mayo, S. L. Design, structure 
and stability of a hyperthermophilic protein variant. 
Nat. Struct. Biol. 5, 470–475 (1998).

120. Magliery, T. J. Protein stability: computation, sequence 
statistics, and new experimental methods. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 33, 161–168 (2015).

121. Goldenzweig, A. & Fleishman, S. J. Principles of 

protein stability and their application in computational 
design. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 87, 105–129 (2018).
122. Borgo, B. & Havranek, J. J. Automated selection of 

stabilizing mutations in designed and natural proteins. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 1494–1499 (2012).
123. Dantas, G., Kuhlman, B., Callender, D., Wong, M. & 
Baker, D. A large scale test of computational protein 
design: folding and stability of nine completely 
redesigned globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 332, 
449–460 (2003).

124. Murphy, G. S. et al. Increasing sequence diversity  

with flexible backbone protein design: the complete 
redesign of a protein hydrophobic core. Structure 20, 
1086–1096 (2012).

125. Bednar, D. et al. FireProt: energy- and evolution-based 

computational design of thermostable multiple-point 
mutants. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004556 (2015).

126. Lehmann, M., Pasamontes, L., Lassen, S. F. &  

Wyss, M. The consensus concept for thermostability 
engineering of proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1543, 
408–415 (2000).

127. Campeotto, I. et al. One-step design of a stable  

variant of the malaria invasion protein RH5 for use as 
a vaccine immunogen. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 
998–1002 (2017).

128. Kapp, G. T. et al. Control of protein signaling using  
a computationally designed GTPase/GEF orthogonal 
pair. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 5277–5282 
(2012).

129. Jenson, J. M., Ryan, J. A., Grant, R. A., Letai, A. & 

Keating, A. E. Epistatic mutations in PUMA BH3 drive 
an alternate binding mode to potently and selectively 
inhibit anti-apoptotic Bfl-1. eLife 6, e25541 (2017).

130. Froning, K. J. et al. Computational design of a specific 
heavy chain/κ light chain interface for expressing fully 
IgG bispecific antibodies. Protein Sci. 26, 2021–2038 
(2017).

131. Leaver-Fay, A. et al. Computationally designed 

bispecific antibodies using negative state repertoires. 
Structure 24, 641–651 (2016).

132. Lewis, S. M. et al. Generation of bispecific IgG 

antibodies by structure-based design of an orthogonal 
Fab interface. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 191–198 (2014).  
In this study, multi-state design simulations are 
used to create altered specificity interactions 
between antibody constant domains, allowing the 
proper assembly of IgG antibodies that recognize 
two separate antigens simultaneously.

133. Krishnamurthy, A. & Jimeno, A. Bispecific antibodies 
for cancer therapy: a review. Pharmacol. Ther. 185, 
122–134 (2018).

134. Berger, S. et al. Computationally designed high 
specificity inhibitors delineate the roles of BCL2  
family proteins in cancer. eLife 5, e20352 (2016).

135. Stranges, P. B. & Kuhlman, B. A comparison of 
successful and failed protein interface designs 
highlights the challenges of designing buried hydrogen 
bonds. Protein Sci. 22, 74–82 (2013).

136. King, N. P. et al. Computational design of 

self-assembling protein nanomaterials with atomic 
level accuracy. Science 336, 1171–1174 (2012).

137. King, N. P. et al. Accurate design of co-assembling 

multi-component protein nanomaterials. Nature 510, 
103–108 (2014).

138. Bale, J. B. et al. Accurate design of megadalton-scale 

two-component icosahedral protein complexes. 
Science 353, 389–394 (2016).  
One of several papers in which this team 
demonstrate that protein interface design 
combined with modelling of higher-order 
symmetries can be used to create large, 
multi-component protein cages.

139. Butterfield, G. L. et al. Evolution of a designed protein 
assembly encapsulating its own RNA genome. Nature 
552, 415–420 (2017).

140. Liu, Y., Gonen, S., Gonen, T. & Yeates, T. O. 

Near-atomic cryo-EM imaging of a small protein 
displayed on a designed scaffolding system. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 115, 3362–3367 (2018).

141. Liu, Y., Huynh, D. T. & Yeates, T. O. A 3.8 Å resolution 

cryo-EM structure of a small protein bound to an 
imaging scaffold. Nat. Commun. 10, 1864 (2019).

142. Marcandalli, J. et al. Induction of potent neutralizing 

antibody responses by a designed protein 
nanoparticle vaccine for respiratory syncytial virus. 
Cell 176, 1420–1431 (2019).

143. LjubetiČ, A. et al. Design of coiled-coil protein-origami 

cages that self-assemble in vitro and in vivo.  
Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 1094–1101 (2017).

144. Lai, Y.-T., Cascio, D. & Yeates, T. O. Structure of a 
16-nm cage designed by using protein oligomers. 
Science 336, 1129 (2012).

145. Shen, H. et al. De novo design of self-assembling 
helical protein filaments. Science 362, 705–709 
(2018).

146. Gonen, S., DiMaio, F., Gonen, T. & Baker, D.  

Design of ordered two-dimensional arrays mediated 
by noncovalent protein-protein interfaces. Science 
348, 1365–1368 (2015).

147. Zhang, H. V. et al. Computationally designed peptides 
for self-assembly of nanostructured lattices. Sci. Adv. 
2, e1600307 (2016).

148. Tian, Y. et al. Nanotubes, plates, and needles: 

pathway-dependent self-assembly of computationally 
designed peptides. Biomacromolecules 19, 
4286–4298 (2018).

149. Fleishman, S. J. et al. Computational design  

of proteins targeting the conserved stem region of 
influenza hemagglutinin. Science 332, 816–821 
(2011).

150. Chevalier, A. et al. Massively parallel de novo protein 
design for targeted therapeutics. Nature 550, 74–79 
(2017).

151. Adolf-Bryfogle, J. et al. RosettaAntibodyDesign 
(RAbD): a general framework for computational 
antibody design. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006112 
(2018).

www.nature.com/nrmReviews152. Kundert, K. & Kortemme, T. Computational design of 

structured loops for new protein functions. Biol. Chem. 
400, 275–288 (2019).

153. Adolf-Bryfogle, J., Xu, Q., North, B., Lehmann, A.  

& Dunbrack, R. L. Jr PyIgClassify: a database of 
antibody CDR structural classifications. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 43, D432–D438 (2015).

154. Baran, D. et al. Principles for computational design  

of binding antibodies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 
10900–10905 (2017).

155. Kulp, D. W. & Schief, W. R. Advances in 

structure-based vaccine design. Curr. Opin. Virol. 3, 
322–331 (2013).

156. Salvat, R. S. et al. Computationally optimized 
deimmunization libraries yield highly mutated 
enzymes with low immunogenicity and enhanced 
activity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 
E5085–E5093 (2017).

157. Bick, M. J. et al. Computational design of 

environmental sensors for the potent opioid fentanyl. 
eLife 6, e28909 (2017).

158. Polizzi, N. F. et al. De novo design of a hyperstable 

non-natural protein-ligand complex with sub-Å 
accuracy. Nat. Chem. 9, 1157–1164 (2017).

159. Reeve, S. M. et al. Protein design algorithms predict 

viable resistance to an experimental antifolate.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 749–754 (2015).
160. Kiss, G., Çelebi-Ölçüm, N., Moretti, R., Baker, D.  

& Houk, K. N. Computational enzyme design.  
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 52, 5700–5725  
(2013).

161. Baker, D. An exciting but challenging road ahead  
for computational enzyme design. Protein Sci. 19, 
1817–1819 (2010).

162. Ambroggio, X. I. & Kuhlman, B. Computational design 

of a single amino acid sequence that can switch 
between two distinct protein folds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
128, 1154–1161 (2006).

163. Joh, N. H. et al. De novo design of a transmembrane 

Zn2+-transporting four-helix bundle. Science 346, 
1520–1524 (2014).

164. Davey, J. A., Damry, A. M., Goto, N. K. & Chica, R. A. 

Rational design of proteins that exchange on 
functional timescales. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 
1280–1285 (2017).

165. Guntas, G. et al. Engineering an improved 

light-induced dimer (iLID) for controlling the 
localization and activity of signaling proteins.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 112–117 (2015).

166. Dagliyan, O. et al. Engineering extrinsic disorder to 
control protein activity in living cells. Science 354, 
1441–1444 (2016).

167. Dagliyan, O. et al. Computational design of 

chemogenetic and optogenetic split proteins.  
Nat. Commun. 9, 4042 (2018).

168. Blacklock, K. M., Yachnin, B. J., Woolley, G. A. &  

Khare, S. D. Computational design of a photocontrolled 
cytosine deaminase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 14–17 
(2017).

169. Hoersch, D., Roh, S.-H., Chiu, W. & Kortemme, T. 

Reprogramming an ATP-driven protein machine into a 
light-gated nanocage. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 928–932 
(2013).

170. Lindorff-Larsen, K., Piana, S., Dror, R. O. & Shaw, D. E. 
How fast-folding proteins fold. Science 334, 517–520 
(2011).

171. Dror, R. O. et al. Structural basis for nucleotide 

exchange in heterotrimeric G proteins. Science 348, 
1361–1365 (2015).

172. Correia, B. E. et al. Proof of principle for 

epitope-focused vaccine design. Nature 507, 
201–206 (2014).  
Correia et al. used a de novo protein design  
to generate a small protein that mimics a 
conformational epitope from RSV and elicits 
neutralizing antibodies in animal studies.

Acknowledgements
The authors apologize to the scientists whose important work 
could not be cited in this Review owing to space constraints. 
This work was supported by NIH grants R01GM117968  
and R35GM131923 to B.K. and R01GM121487 and 
R01GM123378 to P.B.

Author contributions
Both authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Peer review information
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks W. DeGrado, 
T. O. Yeates and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their 
contribution to the peer review of this work.

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-019-0163-x.

Related links
CAsP protein structure prediction experiment: http://
predictioncenter.org/casp13
DeepContact: https://github.com/largelymfs/deepcontact
DeepCov: https://github.com/psipred/DeepCov
evfold: http://evfold.org/evfold-web/evfold.do
RaptorX-Contact: http://raptorx.uchicago.edu/ContactMap/
TripletRes: https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/TripletRes/
OsPReY: https://www2.cs.duke.edu/donaldlab/osprey.php
PsiPReD: http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/
Rosetta: https://www.rosettacommons.org/

 

 volume 20 | NovemBeR 2019  | 697

NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlecUlar cell BiOlOgyReviews