The developing toolkit of continuous directed 
evolution

Mary S. Morrison1,2,3,4, Christopher J. Podracky1,2,4 and David R. Liu 

 1,2,4 ✉

Continuous directed evolution methods allow the key steps of evolution—gene diversification, selection, and replication—to 
proceed  in  the  laboratory  with  minimal  researcher  intervention.  As  a  result,  continuous  evolution  can  find  solutions  much  
more quickly than traditional discrete evolution methods. Continuous evolution also enables the exploration of longer and more 
numerous evolutionary trajectories, increasing the likelihood of accessing solutions that require many steps through sequence 
space and greatly facilitating the iterative refinement of selection conditions and targeted mutagenesis strategies. Here we review  
the  historical  advances  that  have  expanded  continuous  evolution  from  its  earliest  days  as  an  experimental  curiosity  to  its  
present state as a powerful and surprisingly general strategy for generating tailor-made biomolecules, and discuss more recent 
improvements with an eye to the future.

Pioneered in 1967 by Sol Spiegelman, directed evolution is a 

process by which researchers generate or improve molecules 
with desired functions using Darwinian principles. The advent 
of  new  directed  evolution  methodologies,  coupled  with  dramatic 
decreases in the cost of DNA synthesis and DNA sequencing, has 
greatly increased the speed and scope of directed evolution. Indeed, 
laboratory evolution has become a workhorse for the generation of 
novel therapeutics and biotechnology tools.

In all cases, the evolution of biomolecules requires generation 
of genetic diversity, translation of genetic information into corre-
sponding variant molecules (if the evolving molecules are not genes 
themselves),  selection  of  variants  with  favorable  properties,  and 
replication of the genes encoding the selected variants (Fig. 1). In 
a traditional directed evolution experiment, at least some of these 
steps are carried out manually, necessitating substantial investment 
of researcher time and lengthy evolution campaigns, which typically 
take months or longer to complete. Continuous evolution, by con-
trast, automates all of these steps, greatly reducing the generation 
time and the effort required from the researcher during evolution. 
These  advantages  enable  large  sequence-space  searches,  iterative 
improvements, and dramatic changes in phenotype over practical 
time scales. Continuous directed evolution has been applied to a 
wide array of biological tools, from early improvements of catalytic 
nucleic acids to more recent functional improvements to proteins, 
including  new  high-affinity  nanobodies,  insecticidal  crystal  pro-
teins  that  overcome  insect  pest  resistance,  proteases  with  altered 
protein cleavage specificities, and CRISPR enzymes with new tar-
geting capabilities.

We  define  a  continuous  evolution  method  as  one  that  does 
not  require  researcher  manipulation  to  carry  out  the  transition 
from  genotype  to  phenotype  and,  after  selection,  back  to  geno-
type.  Traditionally,  continuous  evolution  methods  have  used 
continuous dilution or serial passaging, although advances in auto-
mation are making plate-based approaches a more practical pos-
sibility. Continuous directed evolution experiments generally rely 
on Darwinian selection, in which the desired property of the mol-
ecules under selection leads to an increase in replicative fitness of 

the corresponding organism or gene. Continuous, automated cycles 
of  diversification  and  selection  mimic  the  process  of  biological 
evolution over many generations on practical time scales, permit-
ting  deep  exploration  of  evolutionary  trajectories  and  dramatic 
improvements to phenotype.

Continuous evolution in vitro
Pioneering  in  vitro  studies  of  directed  evolution  carried  out  half 
a  century  ago  set  the  stage  for  work  that  continues  to  this  day.  
In 1967, Sol Spiegelman subjected the RNA from Qβ bacteriophage 
to a Darwinian evolution experiment1 (Fig. 2a). RNA extracted from 
the virus was added to a mixture of nucleotides and the Qβ replicase 
to initiate RNA replication. The reaction was serially diluted into 
fresh aliquots of nucleotides and replicase at progressively shorter 
intervals. Decreasing the replication time selected for shorter RNA 
molecules that could be replicated more quickly. After 74 passages 
lasting just under 14 h, the RNAs were reduced in size more than 
80% and were replicated more efficiently. Free of the requirements 
that  come  with  supporting  the  viral  life  cycle,  the  viral  genome 
eliminated sequences that coded for coat proteins and the replicase, 
retaining only sequences that were necessary for replication in the 
artificial environment.

Since  that  time,  other  nucleic  acids  have  been  continuously 
evolved  in  vitro.  The  first  demonstration  of  continuous  directed 
evolution  of  catalytic  function  occurred  in  the  late  1990s,  when 
Gerald Joyce and co-workers established a self-sustaining RNA rep-
lication cycle for RNA molecules capable of catalyzing their own 
ligation to an RNA–DNA substrate2 (Fig. 2b). Joyce and co-workers 
have  since  developed  continuous  directed  evolution  systems  for 
other  RNA  functions3–6.  These  in  vitro  systems  benefit  from  the 
ability to introduce mutations without concern for host fitness and 
the relative ease with which stringency can be modulated.

The major challenge, as is common in the continuous evolution 
field,  is  linking  genotype  to  phenotype.  Although  this  linkage  is 
readily established for nucleic acids with catalytic activities that can 
be directly linked to their replication, linking the activity of a pro-
tein of interest to replication of a gene in vitro is more challenging.  

1Merkin Institute of Transformative Technologies in Healthcare, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 3Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
4Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. ✉e-mail: drliu@fas.harvard.edu

610

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

PersPectivehttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-020-0532-yIn vivo

PCR-based

Mutator
strains
In vivo

Error-prone
polymerases

Chemical

mutagenesis

DNA

shuffling
In vitro

Diversification

Phenotype

Directed
evolution

Genotype

In vivo

In vitro

Selection

Physical
separation

RNA–
peptide
linkage

Viruses

Microbes

In vitro

In vivo

Colony
screens
In vivo

Continuous culture

High-throughput

screens
In vitro

Fig. 1 | an overview of laboratory directed evolution, including major methods for each key step. For a selection to be truly continuous, it must be able to 
rapidly and autonomously support multiple complete evolutionary cycles. In vivo techniques, highlighted in yellow, can facilitate automation. Blue and yellow 
boxes indicate in vitro and in vivo techniques, respectively, whereas regions of green overlap indicate techniques that can be executed both in vitro and in vivo.

Current  methods  for  doing  so,  such  as  mRNA  display,  ribosome 
display, phage display, and in vitro compartmentalization (reviewed 
extensively elsewhere)7, are labor-intensive, and their adaptation for 
continuous evolution has not yet been reported. Linking the geno-
type of a protein to its phenotype is more readily accomplished in 
cells, and as such, in vivo selections are the milieu for all protein 
continuous  evolution  examples  described  to  date.  Nevertheless, 
these  early  in  vitro  studies  vividly  demonstrated  the  potential  of 
continuous directed evolution and provided a foundation for sub-
sequent advances.

Continuous evolution in vivo
During in vivo directed evolution, the process of selection is carried 
out  within  a  unicellular  host  organism.  In  vivo  continuous  evolu-
tion systems offer many features that facilitate Darwinian selection. 
Linkage of genotype and phenotype occurs through the organism’s 
native translation and replication machinery. The major limitations 
of in vivo continuous evolution involve the challenges associated with 
establishing a selection that links the desired property under selec-
tion to gene replication in the context of a cell, as well as the natural 
ceiling on the degree of mutagenesis that can be applied before host 
cell functions required to complete the evolution cycle are disrupted.

Whole-genome mutagenesis
In this section, we summarize foundational work carried out using 
unbiased mutagenesis methods that affect the whole genome. Early 
in  vivo  continuous  directed  evolution  experiments  selected  for  a 
survival  phenotype  with  little  a  priori  focus  on  particular  target 
genes, and these were as much a tool for gene discovery as a tool 

for functional improvement. These early experiments predated the 
sophisticated  tools  that  now  exist  for  targeted  mutagenesis,  dis-
cussed in the next section, but were well served by simpler, contem-
poraneous mutagenesis methods.

Continuous evolution began as a means of exploring the dynam-
ics of an evolving population. The first continuous culture devices, 
fixed-volume vessels with a constant inflow and outflow of media 
to support a liquid microbial culture, were developed in 1950 by 
Jacques Monod8. In the same year, Aaron Novick and Leo Szilard 
independently developed a similar system, coining the term ‘che-
mostat’9 (Fig. 3a). The chemostat was followed by the ‘turbidostat’ 
device, in which inflow and outflow are adjusted to maintain cells at 
a constant optical density10, and by the ‘auxostat’ devices with con-
trolled inflow depending on parameters such as the availability of a 
nutrient11 (Fig. 3b). These new technologies made it possible to cap-
ture the full complexity of a bacterial community under dynamic 
selection  pressures,  leading  to  precise  mathematical  descriptions 
of growth rates, mutation rates, genetic population structures, and 
other foundational parameters12.

Studies of viral evolution were greatly enabled by the develop-
ment of the basic two-vessel structure that supports phage-based 
continuous evolution to date (Fig. 3c)13. Bacteria are maintained in a 
chemostat, permitting growth in the absence of phage parasites, and 
outflowing media containing healthy cells is directed into a vessel 
containing phage. This vessel, called a ‘phage tube’ at that time and 
a ‘lagoon’ by later researchers, is itself a fixed-volume chemostat. 
Phage that fail to propagate are washed out of the lagoon by the 
continuous inflow of new cells. Further innovations in continuous  
flow  systems  followed,  including  the  dual  turbidostat  or  GM3 

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

611

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biologya

b

74 serial passages

Q phage

Q RNA
4,217 bp

Evolved RNA

218 bp

A C

G

U

Q replicase + NTPs

Prom(–)

3߰

5߰

OH

PP

Ligation

3߰

)
–
(
m
o
r
P

5߰

Reverse

transcriptase

Prom(–)

dNTPs

RNA
polymerase

NTPs

P
P
P

5߰

Prom(–)

Prom(+)

Fig. 2 | overview of early in vitro continuous evolution systems. a, Serial 
passaging of RnA from Qβ phage in the presence of Qβ replicase and 
nucleotides selects for shorter molecules that can replicate more quickly1. 
In this artificial environment there is no requirement to produce infectious 
particles, so coat protein and replicase genes that are normally required for 
the viral life cycle are lost over time. b, RnA molecules (blue) are challenged 
to catalyze their self-ligation to a hybrid RnA–DnA (red) substrate that 
contains one strand of a bacteriophage RnA polymerase promoter (prom). 
Hybridization of a DnA primer and reverse transcription yields cDnA. 
Ribozymes that successfully catalyze the ligation acquire a double-stranded 
promoter element that allows them to continuously propagate2.

device,  in  which  permissive  and  non-permissive  media  are  sup-
plied at a user-controlled ratio to manipulate selection stringency  
(Fig. 3d)14, and the morbidostat, in which an antibiotic is supplied 
at a rate determined by real-time monitoring of cell growth, leading 
to antibiotic resistance15.

Using these devices, researchers manipulated the availability of 
specific nutrients to focus selection pressure on specific metabolic 
pathways of interest, the first step in a general trend toward increas-
ingly gene-focused evolution strategies over time. In one seminal 
1967 study, closely related strains of Bacillus subtilis were compared 
by propagating the strains independently and then allowing them 
to compete in one pool under nutrient-rich conditions16. This tech-
nique generated histidine and tryptophan auxotrophs, confirming 
earlier predictions that when a nutrient is in ample supply, auxotro-
phic strains gain a context-dependent fitness advantage17.

they 

represented 

conceptually  bold 

evolution of viruses
Though 
landmarks, 
whole-organism  continuous  evolution  experiments  to  this  point 
rarely generated useful biomolecules. The evolution of novel func-
tion  typically  requires  multiple  mutations  that  work  in  concert. 
When relying on whole-genome mutagenesis to fuel directed evolu-
tion, exploring the necessary swaths of sequence space to access rare 
functional genotypes is often challenging without severely impair-
ing critical host machinery, and even determining which genes are 
mutating in response to the selection pressure can be challenging. 
One strategy to overcome these limitations and achieve useful evo-
lutionary outcomes makes use of viral genomes.

a
Media

Waste

c
Media

Waste

P

P

b
Media

Waste

P

P

Culture

Culture

Additive

P

P

3߰

5߰

d

Culture

Waste

Lagoon

Inducer

Controller

Controller

P

Media

+

–

NaOH

Cleaning

cycle

Waste

Culture

NaOH

Fig. 3 | Systems for continuous culture. ‘P’ indicates a peristaltic pump.  
a, A traditional chemostat8,9. b, Auxostat/turbostat/morbidostat.  
A controller regulates media inflow and outflow rates and/or flow of a 
desired additive, such as a small molecule, metabolite or antibiotic, in 
response to real-time measurements of culture parameters10–12.  
c, Two-vessel system for propagation of viruses. A traditional chemostat 
feeds fresh host cells into a viral population maintained in a fixed-volume 
lagoon vessel. A small-molecule inducer or mutagenic agent may also 
be supplied13,23. d, GM3 culture device. Permissive (+) and restrictive (–) 
media are supplied at a ratio determined by the controller on the basis of 
culture turbidity measurements. The culture is cycled between two vessels 
by the opening and closing of values (indicated by closed and open circles, 
respectively) to permit cleaning cycles14.

The introduction of viral parasites to continuous culture yielded 
seminal  studies  in  phage  biology  and  continuous  co-evolution18. 
The first virus-based directed evolution experiments challenged the 
bacteriophage  PhiX174  to  respond  to  environmental  pressures13. 
Phage experienced roughly 4 × 10−3 mutations per kilobase per gen-
eration and adapted very rapidly. This system was then applied to T7 
phage with the mutagen N-methyl-N′-nitro-N′-nitrosoguanidine to 
further elevate mutagenesis rates19. These studies demonstrated a 
key insight: viral parasites can be used to lift constraints on muta-
genesis imposed by host fitness without decoupling phenotypic and 
genotypic information.

Temporal control of mutagenesis
Another set of strategies exploit temporal control of mutagenesis to 
bypass mutagenic load restrictions. The high and consistent muta-
tion rates of mutator strains such as Escherichia coli XL1-Red can help 
access new functionalities, but compromise host fitness20. Inducible 
expression of mutagenesis genes permits the researcher to switch 
between  states  of  low  and  high  mutagenesis.  Feedback-regulated 
evolution of phenotype (FREP) was described in 2013. FREP pro-
vided one of the first examples of an engineered circuit that could 

612

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biologyselect for a non-growth-linked phenotype21. Researchers syntheti-
cally coupled mutagenesis levels with a desired phenotype: a small 
metabolite acts through binding of synthetic transcription factors 
to  inactivate  transcription  of  the  highly  mutagenic  MutD5.  The 
absence of the small molecule leads to elevated mutagenesis that is 
generally deleterious for the cell. Using MutD5 as both the selective 
agent and the mutagenic agent, researchers were able to enhance 
production of tyrosine and isopentenyl diphosphate in both yeast 
and E. coli within a single round of batch-culture evolution. The 
FREP platform was later used in a plate-based serial dilution cul-
ture configuration to evolve acid tolerance in E. coli22
. In 2015, a 
series of potent and broad-spectrum in vivo mutagenesis plasmids 
were developed for use in E. coli. The most potent of these plasmids, 
mutagenesis plasmid 6 (MP6), encodes a cassette of six mutagenic 
genes affecting proofreading, mismatch repair, base selection, and 
base excision. MP6 enhances genome-wide mutation rates by 3.2 × 
105-fold with small-molecule induction, permitting temporal con-
trol of mutagenesis23.

Spatial control of mutagenesis
A  final  set  of  strategies  improve  control  of  mutagenesis  location.  
Such  strategies  are  a  useful  intermediate  between  unbiased 
whole-genome  mutagenesis  and  gene-focused  techniques  dis-
cussed in the next section; these require some a priori understand-
ing of the genes being targeted but can mutagenize multiple genes 
and  pathways  at  once.  Multiplex  automated  genome  engineering 
(MAGE)  is  an  automated  system  for  continuous  diversification, 
dictated by synthetic, partially degenerate DNA oligos that target 
and  mutagenize  specific  sites  in  the  genome24.  Though  limited 
by  transformation  efficiencies,  MAGE  is  highly  adaptable  and 
has  been  used  to  reverse-engineer  mutations  in  an  E.  coli  strain 
to  overproduce  l-serine25,  to  generate  diversity  in  a  selection  for 
non-canonical amino acid (ncAA)-specific aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
thetases26, and to optimize translation machinery for use in cell-free, 
ncAA-compatible protein synthesis27.

MAGE  was  not  originally  applicable  to  eukaryotes  because  of 
poor targeting efficiencies, but by directing oligos to anneal dur-
ing DNA replication, researchers were able to implement MAGE in  
S. cerevisiae28. A conceptually similar strategy was implemented with 
CRISPR-enabled trackable genome engineering (CREATE)29. Guide 
RNAs that target specific loci are transformed into Cas9-expressing 
cells along with cargo that is inserted via homology-directed repair 
after Cas9 cleavage. Automation is sufficiently advanced that these 
methods offer many of the benefits of continuous evolution systems 
even though they require researcher intervention during each cycle 
and thus are not technically continuous24.

gene-directed evolution
As  genetic  understanding  improved  and  the  toolkit  of  molecu-
lar biology expanded, it became possible to select for specific and 
diverse functions in continuous cultures. Whereas whole-genome 
mutagenesis and selection is unbiased, fitness-focused, and limited 
by toxicity, gene-directed evolution aims to focus both mutagenesis 
and selection pressure upon one or a few specific genes of inter-
est, taking advantage of a priori knowledge to yield rapid, dramatic, 
and  useful  changes.  Table  1  summarizes  the  major  targeted  or 
gene-directed in vivo systems we describe here. The categorization 
system used in this analysis defines a continuous evolution platform 
as one that has been demonstrated to require no manipulations by 
researchers  to  carry  out  all  of  the  steps  of  the  evolutionary  cycle 
throughout the duration of a typical experiment. We note that other 
valid definitions produce different classifications and that advances 
in automation may broaden the scope of functional continuous evo-
lution methods in the future.

Early  continuous  evolution  experiments  were  limited  to  traits 
natively linked to fitness in the context of liquid culture, such as 

essential metabolism or antibiotic resistance. The introduction of 
synthetic gene circuits that couple Darwinian fitness to a wide array 
of functions has allowed researchers to improve individual mole-
cules for a broad range of useful applications. In the first and sim-
plest synthetic circuits, an auxotrophic microbe was deprived of an 
essential nutrient and instead supplied with a non-native precursor, 
creating selective pressure for novel enzymatic activities to comple-
ment  its  auxotrophy.  In  one  example,  an  auxotroph  lacking  the 
necessary  aminotransferase  to  make  branched-chain  amino  acids 
instead evolved an aspartate aminotransferase that could recognize 
branched side chains30. Later, more sophisticated circuits converted 
some  specific  biological  function  of  the  gene  of  interest,  such  as 
binding another molecule or altering a strand of DNA, into a sur-
vival signal. Such highly specific selection pressures favored equally 
specific  mutagenesis  methods  over  whole-genome  mutagenesis. 
By targeting mutagenesis to one gene, a researcher can access high 
effective mutagenesis rates without losing overall host fitness, com-
bining the benefits of in vivo continuous flow platforms with rapid 
diversification on par with in vitro approaches.

Polymerases and retroelements
One strategy to elevate mutation rates in a targeted fashion is the use 
of a dedicated, orthogonal polymerase. Whole-genome mutagenesis 
may lead to accumulations of confounding mutations in the cell and 
loss of mutagenic effectiveness over time31. Orthogonal polymerases 
circumvent this problem by targeting mutagenesis precisely to the 
DNA of interest. A related consideration is the orthogonality of the 
gene with respect to polymerase enzymes; background replication 
of a gene by a native, high-fidelity polymerase can decrease effective 
mutagenesis rates.

Early strategies for targeted mutagenesis in E. coli used the DNA 
repair polymerase Pol I, which replicates only 1% of the genome 
before  being  displaced  by  the  main  DNA  replication  polymerase 
Pol III32. A gene of interest was encoded in a region of the ColE1 
plasmid  preferentially  replicated  by  Pol  I  and  replicated  using  a 
highly mutagenic variant of Pol I. Even more mutagenic Pol I vari-
ants were developed soon after, and these were applied to the evolu-
tion of aztreonam-hydrolyzing TEM β-lactamases33. Although the 
researchers  were  able  to  achieve  ~400-fold  increases  in  mutation 
rates  in  ColE1  plasmid  compared  to  overall  chromosomal  DNA, 
permitting 8.1 × 10-4 mutations per base pair (bp) in the gene of 
interest without major loss of host fitness, the Pol I system is not 
truly orthogonal, as some portion of the host chromosomal DNA is 
still subject to enhanced mutagenesis from mutagenic Pol I. Further, 
the target gene is not entirely orthogonal, as Pol I-deficient strains 
used in the study retain some native, high-fidelity Pol I activity.

A more recent variant of this approach established an orthogo-
nal DNA replication system in Saccharomyces cerevisiae based on 
a  naturally  occurring  linear  plasmid  from  Kluyveromyces  lactis34 
(Fig. 4a). This linear plasmid is capped by terminal proteins and 
replicated  solely  by  a  dedicated  DNA  polymerase.  When  these 
components  are  provided  in  trans  in  S.  cerevisiae,  the  exogenous 
polymerase replicates the linear plasmid, but not the host genome, 
whereas  endogenous  polymerases  replicate  the  host  genome,  but 
not the linear plasmid. This orthogonal replication system allows 
the linear plasmid to be replicated with higher levels of mutagen-
esis than can be tolerated in the host genome. Subsequent work to 
increase the error rate of the polymerase generated a suite of poly-
merases that should allow researchers to tune mutagenesis levels31. 
The most mutagenic orthogonal polymerase–plasmid pair from the 
OrthoRep system supports mutation rates 100,000-fold higher than 
the host genome. Notably, these high mutation rates along the linear 
plasmid were found to be stable for at least 90 generations with-
out any detectable change in genomic mutation rate. The scalability 
of the system permitted 90 independent evolutions of dihydrofo-
late  reductase  to  be  conducted  in  parallel,  revealing  a  previously 

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

613

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl BiologyTable 1 | an overview of gene-directed in vivo mutagenesis tools and evolution platforms
Name
FReP

Cycle
Mutagenesis agent
nC (CC) Mutator gene MutD

org.
E. coli21,22, S. cer21 WG, nO

Target

MAGe

E. coli24–27, S. cer28 ML, nO

nC, A

Degenerate oligo  
incorporation

CReATe

E. coli, S. cer29

S/ML, nO

nC, A

MP6

E. coli23

WG, nO

Auxotrophe 
complement-ation
Mutagenic Pol 
I-mediated

Any model 
microbe30
E. coli32,33

WG, nO

SL, SOT, SOP C

C

C

Cas9 cleavage and 
homology-directed repair  
with mutagenesis
Mutator genes DNAQ926,  
dam, seqA, emrR, ugi, cda1

Innate, chemical insult or 
mutator strain
error-prone polymerase

Mutagenic rate
Regulated by function 
of evolving gene; not 
quantified
~1.35 × 10-7 substitutions 
per bp per cycle, 
depending on oligo 
design24
not quantified; can also 
cover incorporation

~6.2 × 10−6 
substitutions per bp per 
generation23
Basal mutation rates of 
strain
~8.1 × 10-4 mutations 
per bp per generation33

Ortho-Rep

S. cer34,31

SL, OT, OP

C

error-prone dedicated 
polymerase

~1 × 10-5 mutations per 
bp per generation31

Ty1-mediated / ICe S. cer35

SL, OP, nOT nC (CC) Ty1 transposon 

error-prone reverse 
transcriptase

Retron-mediated

E. coli36

S/M ~75-bp, 
OP, nOT

nC (CC) error-prone replication 

of a retron before 
incorporation into a site 
of interest

Heritable 
recombination

S. cer37

SL, nO

TaGTeAM

S. cer38

S/ML, nO

MutaT7

E. coli39

CRISPR-X

Mamm40

evolvR

PACe

E. coli41

M13 phage  
in E. coli23,42–53

S/ML, OP, 
nOT

S/M 100 bp, 
nO

S/M <350 
bp, OP, nOT
SL, OP, OT

nC (CC) Homologous 

recombination with 
mutagenic library  
cassette plasmid; sexual 
recombination

nC (CC) DnA-3-methyladenine 
glycosylase-mediated 
homologous 
recombination

nC (CC) APOBeC1 deaminase  

recruited by Cas9 
complex

nC (CA) Activation induced 
cytodine deaminase 
recruited by  
Cas9 complex

nC (CA) error-prone polymerase 

C

recruited by Cas9 complex
MP6, M13 error-prone 
polymerase

Adeno-virus- 
mediated

Adeno-virus in 
mamm54.

SL, OP, OT

nC (CA) error-prone variant of 
adenoviral polymerase

VeGAS

Sindbis virus in 
mamm55

SL, OP, OT

nC (CA) error-prone Sindbis virus 

polymerase

~1.5 × 10-4 substitutions 
per bp per transposon 
replication; low 
integration may increase 
effective value35.
~1 × 10-6 substitutions 
per bp per generation36

~6 × 10-2 substitutions 
per bp over 10 h  
(~1 × 10-2 substitutions 
per generation) at 
targeted base37
~1 × 10-7 substitutions 
per bp per generation in 
20 kb targeted region38

~6.7 × 10-6 substitutions 
per bp per generation39

~1 × 10-3 per bp per 
generation in hotspots40

~2.4 × 10-6 per bp per 
generation in hotspots41
~2.3 × 10-3 mutations per 
base per viral generation 
with MP623
~3.7 × 10-5 substitutions 
per bp per viral 
generation54
~1 × 10-3 substitutions per 
base per viral generation55

Key limitations
Limited to production of small 
molecules

Bottlenecked by transformation 
efficiencies

Bottlenecked by transformation 
efficiencies

Restricted to E. coli; detrimental 
to host fitness

Restricted to metabolic 
pathways
Mutagenesis restricted to  
~700 bp; cultures must be 
grown to saturation
Persistence of the host cell leads 
to bias toward mutations which 
improve overall growth rate
Incorporation throughout 
the genome may reduce host 
fitness; multiple integrations 
can occur

Small hotspot restricts unbiased 
mutagenesis coverage, 
mutations accumulate in retron 
homology region
Bottlenecked by transformation 
efficiencies

TaGTeAM array has limited 
long-term stability

Bias toward C → T
mutations; unclear whether 
mutagenesis correlates with 
distance from promoter
Bias toward C → T
mutations; mutation rate 
strongly dependent on 
proximity to PAM
Mutation rate strongly 
dependent on proximity to PAM
Restricted to E. coli cytoplasm

Bias toward A → G and G → A 
mutations; low mutation rate

Lack of availability of negative  
or logic-gated selections;  
24 h/round

Key limitations that should be considered when applying each method are included. S. cer, S. cerevisiae; mamm, mammalian cells; WG, whole-genome; SL, single-locus; ML, multiple locus; S/M, single or multiple; 
nO, non-orthogonal; OP, orthogonal polymerase; OT, orthogonal target; C, continuous flow; nC, non-continuous flow, A, automated; CC, compatible with continuous flow; CA, compatible with automation.

614

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biologyunknown  complexity  in  the  DHFR  fitness  landscape.  Host  cells 
persist throughout evolution, so OrthoRep is theoretically subject 
to loss of efficiency due to genomic mutations, but these mutations 
accumulate only at basal rates.

In conceptually similar work, continuous mutagenesis of genes 
and  pathways  in  yeast  was  achieved  via  cycling  of  a  retrotrans-
poson35  (Fig.  4b).  Instead  of  an  orthogonal,  error-prone  DNA 
polymerase, the ICE system relies on the error-prone reverse tran-
scriptase of the Ty1 transposon. The reverse transcriptase intro-
duces  mutations  exclusively  along  the  length  of  the  transposon 
and at higher mutation rates than can be supported by endoge-
nous DNA polymerases. Using this strategy, researchers evolved 
the  gene  product  of  the  URA3  marker,  orotidine  5′-phosphate 
decarboxylase, for improved substrate specificity, as well as a gene 
for butanol tolerance, and a multigene pathway for xylose catab-
olism. For each of these applications, the Ty1-based system was 
used to generate libraries of mutants that were then subjected to 
selection. In a direct comparison, the libraries generated by this 
system arrived at solutions for improved URA3 substrate specific-
ity faster than libraries generated by error-prone PCR. Although 
a complete cycle of ICE is non-continuous as reported due to the 
nature  of  the  selection  used,  ICE  is  likely  compatible  with  cur-
rently available devices for continuous culture and selection. One 
potential concern is that spurious incorporation of the transposon 
throughout the genome may damage host fitness and reduce the 
efficiency of selection.

A final method in this category uses engineered retrons for tar-
geted mutagenesis36 (Fig. 4c). The retron is targeted using a pro-
grammable strand of DNA, known as the targeting strand, which 
is homologous to the targeted locus, but also bears a desired edit. 
Using an error-prone RNA polymerase to transcribe the retron, in 
conjunction  with  the  retron’s  inherently  mutagenic  reverse  tran-
scriptase,  researchers  were  able  to  introduce  mutations  into  the 
retron’s targeting sequence. This targeting sequence of ~75 bp was 
then incorporated into the homologous region of a gene of interest, 
inducing highly targeted mutagenesis at a small site.

Targeted DNa damage
Another  approach  to  targeted  mutagenesis  in  vivo  relies  on  the 
ability  to  target  DNA  damage  to  specific  loci.  In  one  example, 
site-specific  endonucleases  were  used  to  liberate  fragments  of  a 
mutagenic  cassette  to  initiate  integration  into  a  target  gene  by 
homologous recombination37. Guided base excision by tetracycline 
repressor  protein-fused  DNA  glycosylases  has  been  used  for  tar-
geted mutagenesis via homologous recombination in yeast38. DNA 
damage by a cytosine deaminase–T7 polymerase fusion construct 
has also been reported39. This chimeric protein, dubbed MutaT7, is 
able to direct C→T mutagenesis to genes of interest that are under 
the control of the T7 promoter.

The  rise  of  CRISPR–Cas9  systems  has  particularly  enabled 
mutagenesis  by  targeted  DNA  damage.  One  technique,  termed 
CRISPR-X,  uses  dead  Cas9  (dCas9)  and  guide  RNAs  containing 
MS2  binding-site  hairpins  to  localize  MS2–cytosine  deaminase 
fusions near the dCas9 complex. The hyperactive deaminases cause 
C→T mutations in a 100-bp region near the complex40. CRISPR-X 
has  been  applied  in  mammalian  cells  with  non-continuous 
fluorescence-activated  cell  sorting  (FACS)  and  plate-based  serial 
passaging;  the  latter  method  could  be  rendered  truly  continuous 
by automation using liquid-handling robotics or by application in 
mammalian suspension cell culture.

Similarly, researchers have used nicking variants of Cas9 to tar-
get mutagenic Pol I to a user-defined window not restricted to the 
ColE1 plasmid41. This system, EvolvR, yields overall cellular toxic-
ity similar to WT Pol I and targeting mutagenic rates of 2.4 × 10-6 
mutations per nucleotide per generation or higher to a user-defined 
locus. Although the mutagenic Pol I appears to behave orthogonally, 

a

Cytosol

Host
DNAP

Plastid

Genome

Nucleus

b

TP

Linear plasmid

TP

GOI

TP–DNAP

Replication

c

Error-prone
RNAP

Guide

Target

LTR Gag–Pol

GOI

LTR

Transcription

LTR Gag–Pol

GOI

LTR

Reverse
transcription

LTR Gag–Pol

LTR

Integration

Transcription

Reverse
transcription

GOI

Targeting

Fig. 4 | Continuous evolution via orthogonal polymerases and reverse 
transcriptases. a, In the OrthoRep system, a terminal protein–orthogonal 
DnA polymerase pair (TP–DnAP) is exported to the cytosol, where it 
replicates a linear plasmid that is capped by terminal proteins (TP) and 
bears the evolving gene of interest (GOI). TP–DnAP pairs engineered for 
decreased fidelity result in error rates up to 100,000-fold higher than the 
genomic mutation rate, and the only means of linear plasmid propagation 
is replication by TP–DnAP. Mutations (stars) thus accumulate quickly 
along the gene of interest. The host genome and the plasmid that encodes 
TP–DnAP are both replicated in the nucleus by endogenous polymerases, 
leaving the genomic mutation rate unaltered and making deleterious 
mutations in TP–DnAP unlikely, allowing stable maintenance of its 
mutation rate over many generations34,31. b, The Ty1 retrotransposon can 
be modified for use in directed evolution by introducing adding the gene of 
interest to the long-terminal repeats (LTR), structural proteins (Gag), and 
reverse transcriptase (Pol) needed for transposon cycling. The modified 
transposon is incorporated into the host genome and then transcribed. The 
mRnA transcript is subject to error-prone reverse transcription, resulting 
in mutations introduced along the gene of interest and the rest of the 
cassette at a higher rate than the host genome. The mutagenized cDnA 
is integrated back into the genome, and the cycle repeats35. c, A retron 
under control of an error-prone RnA polymerase (RnAP) is mutagenized 
upon transcription. Reverse transcriptase acts on the targeting sequence 
of the retron, creating a DnA (solid line)–RnA (dashed line) hybrid and 
introducing additional mutations to the targeting sequence. The targeting 
sequence is inserted into homologous regions of the gene of interest and 
incorporates the mutations that it accumulated from transcription and 
reverse transcription36.

the genetic locus of interest may be replicated by both mutagenic 
Pol I and endogenous, high-fidelity polymerases. EvolvR generated 
de novo streptomycin and spectinomycin resistance in both plas-
mids and genomic genes within 32 h by serial back-dilution and 
is in theory fully compatible with continuous culture devices as is.

evolution of genes using viruses
A final group of methods for targeted in vivo mutagenesis in a man-
ner that supports continuous evolution utilizes error-prone replica-
tion and propagation by viruses. Because the virus is the functional 

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

615

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl BiologyInﬂow

pIII production

Outﬂow

a

Polymerase

T7

gIII

Target promoter

pIII

gIII

Host cells 

Evolving protein

AP

Pol

Phage-assisted

continuous evolution

(PACE)

AP

MP

AP

MP

SP

AP

MP

Arabinose

AraC

MP

Mutagenic

genes

Evolving

gene

SP

Phage
genes

Fig. 5 | Phage-assisted continuous evolution (PaCe). Phage are provided 
with constant influx of fresh host cells. Genetic circuits on a host accessory 
plasmid (AP) supply pIII (purple) from gene III (gIII) in response to the 
desired function of an evolving protein, which is encoded by the selection 
phage (SP) in place of its native gene III. Phage that fail to induce pIII 
production cannot propagate and are washed out of the system42.  
A mutagenesis plasmid (MP) encodes mutagenic genes under the control 
of the arabinose-regulated AraC protein regulatory element. Mutagenic 
gene products create genetic diversity upon induction with arabinose23.  
Pol indicates an RnA polymerase. Adapted with permission from ref. 23.

unit  of  evolution,  host  cells  can  be  continually  replaced,  raising 
mutagenic ceilings and avoiding the accumulation of mutations in 
the selection machinery.

Phage-assisted continuous evolution (PACE) increases the over-
all rate of evolution by using a phage parasite to target mutagenesis to 
a gene of interest42. In PACE, the gene encoding a critical phage coat 
protein, pIII, is deleted from the genome of the M13 bacteriophage 
and replaced by an evolving gene of interest. A turbidostat-lagoon 
or chemostat-lagoon system is used to provide a constant inflow of 
fresh E. coli host cells to the replicating phage population, prevent-
ing the accumulation of mutations in the host genome. A synthetic 
plasmid-encoded circuit in the host cell provides pIII in trans in 
response to some desired function of the gene of interest. Phage that 
cannot induce pIII production fail to propagate and are ‘washed out’ 
of the system by continuous inflow.

Each phage generation represents one round of evolution. Phage 
replication is rapid and productive; a single cell may produce close 
to 1,000 progeny phage within 1 h of infection, with new phage par-
ticles emerging 10 min after infection43. An inducible ‘mutagenesis 
plasmid’ enhances mutation rates up to 7.2 × 10-5 substitutions per 
base per generation of phage (Fig. 5).

In the first PACE studies, T7 RNA polymerase evolved robust 
activity  on  a  non-canonical  T3  promoter  in  a  matter  of  days  
(Fig.  6a)42.  Following  the  advent  of  a  negative  selection  strategy 
employing a dominant negative variant of the pIII gene, T7 RNA 
polymerase  not  only  evolved  activity  upon  the  T3  promoter,  but 
also lost activity on its native T7 promoter, demonstrating a selec-
tive shift in substrate specificity44. By fusing T7 RNA polymerase 
to an inhibitor domain using a linker containing a protease cleav-
age site, pIII expression was linked to the substrate recognition and 
catalytic activity of a protease to predict mutations conferring anti-
biotic resistance in hepatitis C viral proteases45 and to reprogram the 
target motifs of tobacco etch virus proteases (Fig. 6b)46.

Translation

e

AARS

nsAA

T7

Protein

Target DNA

Pol

Editor

f

g

...NNNTGGNNN...
...NNNAUUNNN...
Degron

T7

No edit

TGG TAA

T7

T7

b

Inhibitor

No pIII 

T7

Protease

T7

Substrate 

c

Protein

Target

d
Protein

Pol

T7

Fig. 6 | PaCe selection strategies. a, T7 RnA polymerase promoter binding 
selection42,44. b, Protease substrate selection45,46. Proteolysis of a desired 
substrate breaks a linker, freeing T7 from its inhibitor domain. c, Protein–
protein binding selection47. native E. coli RnA polymerase (Pol) ω-subunit is 
tethered to the evolving protein. d, Soluble expression selection. Misfolding 
of the evolving protein causes the n-terminal subunit of T7 polymerase to 
misfold48. e, Aminoacyl-tRnA synthetase (AARS) selection49. Successful 
charging of a tRnA that recognizes amber stop codons with a non-standard 
amino acid (nsAA) allows readthrough of amber stop codons in T7 pol.  
f, DnA-binding one-hybrid selection50–52. Recognition of a DnA motif,  
such as a PAM, by a protein recruits Pol to the promoter via its ω-subunit. 
g, Base editor activity selection53. A functional editor converts C to U 
(green), producing a stop codon (TAG) on the opposite strand that prevents 
translation of a degron tag.

In 2016, researchers developed a system for PACE evolution of 
protein–protein binding analogous to the yeast two-hybrid system, 
in which a target protein is fused to a subunit of a polymerase. The 
interaction  between  a  DNA-bound  ‘bait’  protein  and  an  evolving 
target protein recruits the polymerase to a promoter, inducing pIII 
transcription (Fig. 6c)47. Using this system, insecticidal crystal toxins 
from Bacillus thuringiensis were evolved to bind pest insect intesti-
nal proteins, resulting in enhanced toxicity profiles. The two-hybrid 
system  was  later  expanded  upon  to  select  both  for  binding  
and  solubility48.  In  the  solubility  selection,  T7  polymerase  is 
expressed  as  a  C-terminal  fusion  to  the  evolving  protein,  such 
that a misfold of the protein causes a misfolding of the polymerase  
(Fig. 6d). The two circuits are implemented simultaneously using 
a logical AND gate; each circuit provides a part of pIII, which is 
reconstituted by an intein only when both parts are present.

PACE  has  also  been  applied  to  generate  an  orthogonal 
aminoacyl-tRNA  synthetase  for  incorporation  of  non-canonical 
amino acids49. A chimeric tRNA synthetase from Methanosarcina 
spp. underwent selection for improved enzymatic activity in charg-
ing  an  amber  suppressor  tRNA  with  l-pyrrolysine.  Successful 
amber  stop  suppression  and  pyrrolysine  incorporation  allowed 
read  through  of  pIII,  linking  phage  fitness  to  synthetase  activity  
(Fig. 6e). After 497 h of evolution, the catalytic efficiency of chime-
ric pyrrolysine-tRNA synthetase improved 45-fold.

DNA-binding  PACE  selections  have  been  applied  to  TALENs, 
Cas9 proteins, and Cas9-associated base-editing proteins for genome 
editing. The first such applications used a one-hybrid design to alter 

616

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biologythe DNA-binding characteristics of targeted gene-editing enzymes 
by recruiting a polymerase to transcribe pIII. A 2015 study selected 
for  improved  specificity  in  TALENs  using  the  negative  selec-
tion strategy described above50. Following the rise to prominence 
of  CRISPR–Cas9  technology,  PACE  was  applied  to  Cas9,  select-
ing  for  relaxed  protospacer  adjacent  motif  (PAM)  specificity  in 
Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 and resulting in a shift from an ‘NGG’ 
PAM to an ‘NG’ PAM (Fig. 6f)51. Subsequent studies used a similar 
PACE approach to evolve three Cas9 variants with reprogrammed 
PAM specificities that collectively recognize almost all ‘NR’ PAM 
sites (in which R = A or G) and are well-suited for multiplexing with 
low off-target activity52.

A  PACE  selection  was  developed  in  2019  for  improved  cyto-
sine  base-editing  function  of  a  Cas9-directed  cytidine  deaminase 
enzyme by requiring it not only to bind DNA, but also to convert a 
CCA codon to a TTA codon, restoring a stop and preventing trans-
lation of the degron tag to rescue pIII expression (Fig. 6g)53. This 
selection yielded cytidine deaminase base editors with more than 
25-fold increased efficiency and broader targeting scope.

Though powerful, PACE selections are limited to the bacterial 
cytoplasm. Two conceptually related platforms have recently been 
developed  for  virus-assisted  evolution  in  a  mammalian  cell  host, 
enabling the evolution of therapeutically relevant human proteins. 
Though  neither  system  as  reported  is  continuous,  both  have  the 
potential  to  support  continuous  evolution  with  minor  advances, 
and so we discuss them here with an eye to the future.

In  2018,  a  virus-based  mammalian  host-cell  evolution  plat-
form was described in which the evolutionary unit is a modified 
adenovirus lacking key genes54. The host mammalian cell provides 
a  low-fidelity  form  of  the  adenoviral  polymerase,  and  the  func-
tion of the evolving protein of interest is linked in trans to adeno-
viral  protease  activity  that  permits  viral  maturation.  This  system 
evolved doxycyline-resistant tetracycline transactivator (tTA) pro-
teins  within  five  passages.  The  main  limitation  to  this  system  is 
its mutagenic rate of 3.7 × 10−5 mutations per bp per generation, 
biased  heavily  toward  G→A  and  A→G  transitions,  coupled  with 
a comparatively slower generation time compared to phage (~2.3 
× 10-3 mutations per bp generation with MP6); we note that dox 
resistance requires only a single amino acid mutation, and accessing 
combinations of mutations may prove considerably more challeng-
ing. These issues were addressed the following year with the advent 
of  viral  evolution  of  genetically  actuating  sequences,  or  VEGAS, 
which makes use of the highly mutagenic and rapidly replicating 
Sindbis virus to increase mutagenic rates up to 10-3 per base per viral 
replication and achieve greater library sizes in a mammalian host  
(Fig. 7)55. This system was likewise able to generate dox-resistant 
tTA  in  under  a  week  and  was  further  applied  to  generate  allo-
sterically  activating  nanobodies  and  constitutively  activated 
G-protein-coupled receptors.

New tools and future directions
With the advent of new flow devices, tools for in vivo mutagenesis, 
and molecular circuits for linking fitness to desired genes, continu-
ous evolution has progressed rapidly from an exploratory method to 
a toolbox of powerful and practical systems generating useful mol-
ecules and has come to occupy a formidable position in the arsenal 
of directed evolution strategies.

Looking  forward,  the  application  of  novel  tools  to  continuous 
directed evolution can be expected to further expand its capacity. 
Chief  among  these  are  the  application  of  machine  learning  and 
protein  modeling  for  improved  library  design,  the  inclusion  of 
non-canonical amino acids to expand the range of accessible func-
tionalities, and improvements in automation and continuous cul-
turing devices that may make the field more widely accessible.

With the aid of sophisticated protein-modeling software, a priori 
predictions  can  guide  the  production  of  ‘smart’  starting  libraries 

Harvest virus

Viral evolution of

genetically actuating

sequences
(VEGAS) 

Capsid
proteins

Host cells 

Evolving protein

SSG

Pol

Capsid genes
E3
E1

E2

SSG

SSG

SV

Evolving

gene

SV

Viral
genes

SSG

Virus production

SSG

SV

No virus production

Fig. 7 | Viral evolution of genetically actuating sequences (VegaS).  
A modified Sindbis RnA virus (SV) infects a host population of mammalian 
cells in culture. Host cells have been transfected with an SSG plasmid, 
conceptually similar to the accessory plasmids used in PACe. A genetic 
selection circuit on the SSG plasmid leads to transcription of viral capsid 
genes E1, E2 and E3 in response to function of the evolving protein. These 
capsid genes have been removed from the SV, and the evolving protein is 
encoded in their place. SV encoding non-functional variants of the evolving 
protein cannot induce capsid protein production and thus cannot form viral 
particles. Virus is harvested and infected into fresh host cells55.

that  use 

for evolution to maximize library diversity where it matters most. 
Software suites such as Rosetta model protein folding and stabil-
ity on the basis of calculated free-energy landscapes. The programs 
can be used not only to identify the regions of a protein at which 
diversification is most valuable, but also to design entirely new pro-
teins, opening new avenues for evolution. In one powerful study, 
self-assembling  icosahedral  nanocage  structures  were  designed 
de novo, then subjected to computationally guided targeted muta-
genesis and non-continuous in vivo evolution for the capacity to 
encapsulate the structure’s own RNA, thus generating a rudimen-
tary virus56.

Other software focuses on generating diversity through guided 
recombination; SCHEMA computes interactions between residues 
to  identify  protein  modular  fragments  (‘schemas’),  which  can  be 
exchanged  to  produce  functional  chimeras57.  Machine-learning 
approaches 
iterative  data-directed  algorithms  and 
mine  the  diversity  of  existing  natural  proteins  for  datasets  have 
also  been  developed.  Application  of  just  two  rounds  of  in  silico 
machine-learning library screening followed by in vivo testing of 
hits was sufficient to evolve nitric oxide dioxygenase enzymes that 
produce specific enantiomer forms of their product58.

From  many  directed  evolution  campaigns  too  extensive  to 
cover here, researchers have evolved tRNA synthetases that charge 
suppressor  tRNAs  with  non-canonical  amino  acids  (ncAAs), 
which  in  turn  can  be  used  to  evolve  enzymes  with  access  to 
entirely new chemistries. In the first evolution experiments using 
ncAAs, a host strain evolved tolerance and then preference toward 
fluorinated tryptophan59. Modern ncAA-tolerant host strains are 
recoded to free up amber or ochre STOP codons for assignment 
to ncAAs, but often must be evolved to overcome disruptions to 
the proteome caused by recoding and by inefficient translation of 
proteins containing ncAAs60,61. Evolution of a T7 phage by passag-
ing on a host that incorporated 3-iodotyrosine coded by amber 
stop  codons  revealed  that  the  phage  rapidly  incorporated  the 
ncAA in position 39 of holin II, leading to a fitness advantage62. 

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

617

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl BiologyMore recently, a modified Lactobacillus lactis multidrug resistance 
regulator protein was designed with a p‐aminophenylalanine resi-
due, which catalyzes condensation of aldehydes with hydrazines 
and hydroxylamines63. Non-continuous in vivo evolution of this 
regulator  protein  boosted  substrate  turnover  by  100-fold64.  As 
the  genetic  code  expands  further,  the  design  and  evolution  of 
enzymes with increasingly novel chemical capabilities will likely 
become routine.

The decreasing costs and requirements for automation of bio-
logical manipulations has steadily expanded the umbrella of truly 
continuous evolution to include a broad range of new systems. With 
acoustic  droplet  ejection  technology,  liquid-handling  robots  are 
now capable of carrying out PCR and cloning reactions at the nano-
liter  scale65.  Microfluidic  platforms  have  recently  been  integrated 
with FACS, mass spectrometry, and high-throughput sequencing to 
produce ultra-high-throughput platforms such as microfluidic dou-
ble  water-in-oil-in-water  emulsion  (MDE),  in  which  every  nano-
droplet  is  a  compartmentalized  bioreactor  for  in  vivo  or  in  vitro 
directed  evolution  with  full  genotypic  and  phenotypic  analysis66. 
A high-throughput continuous culture platform called eVOLVER 
(not  to  be  confused  with  EvolvR,  the  Cas9-mediated  mutagen-
esis platform described above) enables precise automated control 
of conditions across dozens of separate populations67. The device 
can  automate  dilution,  temperature  control,  stirring,  cleaning, 
sampling, mixing, and yeast mating, making it a powerful poten-
tial tool for PACE, OrthoRep, and other in vivo continuous evo-
lution systems. This platform and other inexpensive, user-friendly 
continuous culture devices will make the techniques of continuous 
directed evolution available to a larger fraction of the life science 
community68,69. The ability to easily parallelize continuous directed 
evolution experiments should allow researchers to interrogate more 
evolutionary  trajectories,  increasing  the  likelihood  of  discovering 
improved protein variants in a timely manner.

In  the  coming  years,  these  advances,  coupled  with  existing 
technologies, will continue to increase the scope and efficiency of 
continuous evolution experiments. In particular, as these technolo-
gies become more accessible and practical, we anticipate that con-
tinuous  directed  evolution  will  transition  from  a  technique  used 
by specialist research groups to a tool widely used by researchers 
across diverse fields to solve problems in multiple areas of basic and 
applied science.

Received: 16 October 2019; Accepted: 27 March 2020;  
Published online: 22 May 2020

References
 1.  Mills, D. R., Peterson, R. L. & Spiegelman, S. An extracellular Darwinian 

experiment with a self-duplicating nucleic acid molecule. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 58, 217–224 (1967).

 2.  Wright, M. C. & Joyce, G. F. Continuous in vitro evolution of catalytic 

function. Science 276, 614–617 (1997).

 3.  McGinness, K. E., Wright, M. C. & Joyce, G. F. Continuous in vitro evolution 

of a ribozyme that catalyzes three successive nucleotidyl addition reactions. 
Chem. Biol. 9, 585–596 (2002).

 4.  Breaker, R. R., Banerji, A. & Joyce, G. F. Continuous in vitro evolution  

of bacteriophage RNA polymerase promoters. Biochemistry 33,  
11980–11986 (1994).

 5.  Kühne, H. & Joyce, G. F. Continuous in vitro evolution of ribozymes  

that operate under conditions of extreme pH. J. Mol. Evol. 57,  
292–298 (2003).

 6.  Voytek, S. B. & Joyce, G. F. Emergence of a fast-reacting ribozyme that is 

capable of undergoing continuous evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 
15288–15293 (2007).

 7.  Matsuura, T. & Yomo, T. In vitro evolution of proteins. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 101, 

 8.  Monod, J. La technique de culture continue: theorie et applications. Ann. Inst. 

449–456 (2006).

Pasteur 79, 390–410 (1950).

 9.  Novick, A. & Szilard, L. Experiments with the Chemostat on spontaneous 

mutations of bacteria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 36, 708–719 (1950).

 10. Bryson, V. & Szybalski, W. Microbial selection. Science 116, 45–51 (1952).

 11. Larsson, G., Enfors, S. O. & Pham, H. The pH-auxostat as a tool for studying 

microbial dynamics in continuous fermentation. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 36, 
224–232 (1990).

 12. Moser, H. The Dynamics of Bacterial Populations Maintained in the Chemostat.  

(Washington D.C., Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1958).

 13. Bull, J. J. et al. Exceptional convergent evolution in a virus. Genetics 147, 

1497–1507 (1997).

 14. Marlière, P. et al. Chemical evolution of a bacterium’s genome. Angew. Chem. 

Int. Ed. Engl. 50, 7109–7114 (2011).

 15. Toprak, E. et al. Evolutionary paths to antibiotic resistance under dynamically 

sustained drug selection. Nat. Genet. 44, 101–105 (2011).

 16. Zamenhof, S. & Eichhorn, H. H. Study of microbial evolution through loss of 

biosynthetic functions: establishment of “defective” mutants. Nature 216, 
456–458 (1967).

 17. Lwoff, A. L’évolution Physiologique: Étude des Pertes de Fonctions chez les 

Microorganismes. (Paris, Hermann, 1944).

 18. Lenski, R. E. & Levin, B. R. Constraints on the coevolution of bacteria and 

virulent phage: a model, some experiments, and predictions for natural 
communities. Am. Nat. 125, 585–602 (1985).

 19. Hillis, D. M., Bull, J. J., White, M. E., Badgett, M. R. & Molineux, I. J. 

Experimental phylogenetics: generation of a known phylogeny. Science 255, 
589–592 (1992).

 20. Greener, A., Callahan, M. & Jerpseth, B. An efficient random mutagenesis 

technique using an E. coli mutator strain. Mol. Biotechnol. 7, 189–195 (1997).

 21. Chou, H. H. & Keasling, J. D. Programming adaptive control to evolve 

increased metabolite production. Nat. Commun. 4, 2595 (2013).

 22. Pham, H. L. et al. Engineering a riboswitch-based genetic platform for the 

self-directed evolution of acid-tolerant phenotypes. Nat. Commun. 8,  
411 (2017).

 23. Badran, A. H. & Liu, D. R. Development of potent in vivo mutagenesis 
plasmids with broad mutational spectra. Nat. Commun. 6, 8425 (2015).

 24. Wang, H. H. et al. Programming cells by multiplex genome engineering and 

accelerated evolution. Nature 460, 894–898 (2009).

 25. Mundhada, H. et al. Increased production of l-serine in Escherichia coli 
through adaptive laboratory evolution. Metab. Eng. 39, 141–150 (2017).

 26. Amiram, M. et al. Evolution of translation machinery in recoded bacteria 

enables multi-site incorporation of nonstandard amino acids. Nat. Biotechnol. 
33, 1272–1279 (2015).

 27. Martin, R. W. et al. Cell-free protein synthesis from genomically recoded 

bacteria enables multisite incorporation of noncanonical amino acids.  
Nat. Commun. 9, 1203 (2018).

 28. Barbieri, E. M., Muir, P., Akhuetie-Oni, B. O., Yellman, C. M. & Isaacs, F. J. 

Precise editing at DNA replication forks enables multiplex genome 
engineering in eukaryotes. Cell 171, 1453–1467.e13 (2017).

 29. Garst, A. D. et al. Genome-wide mapping of mutations at single-nucleotide 
resolution for protein, metabolic and genome engineering. Nat. Biotechnol. 
35, 48–55 (2017).

 30. Yano, T., Oue, S. & Kagamiyama, H. Directed evolution of an aspartate 

aminotransferase with new substrate specificities. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
95, 5511–5515 (1998).

 31. Ravikumar, A., Arzumanyan, G. A., Obadi, M. K. A., Javanpour, A. A. &  
Liu, C. C. Scalable, continuous evolution of genes at mutation rates above 
genomic error thresholds. Cell 175, 1957.e13 (2018).

 32. Fabret, C. et al. Efficient gene targeted random mutagenesis in genetically 

stable Escherichia coli strains. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, E95 (2000).

 33. Camps, M., Naukkarinen, J., Johnson, B. P. & Loeb, L. A. Targeted gene 

evolution in Escherichia coli using a highly error-prone DNA polymerase I. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 9727–9732 (2003).

 34. Ravikumar, A., Arrieta, A. & Liu, C. C. An orthogonal DNA replication 

system in yeast. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 175–177 (2014).

 35. Crook, N. et al. In vivo continuous evolution of genes and pathways in yeast. 

Nat. Commun. 7, 13051 (2016).

 36. Simon, A. J., Morrow, B. R. & Ellington, A. D. Retroelement-based genome 

editing and evolution. ACS Synth. Biol. 7, 2600–2611 (2018).

 37. Romanini, D. W., Peralta-Yahya, P., Mondol, V. & Cornish, V. W. A heritable 
recombination system for synthetic Darwinian evolution in yeast. ACS Synth. 
Biol. 1, 602–609 (2012).

 38. Finney-Manchester, S. P. & Maheshri, N. Harnessing mutagenic homologous 
recombination for targeted mutagenesis in vivo by TaGTEAM. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 41, e99 (2013).

 39. Moore, C. L., Papa, L. J. III & Shoulders, M. D. A processive protein chimera 
introduces mutations across defined DNA regions in vivo. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
140, 11560–11564 (2018).

 40. Hess, G. T. et al. Directed evolution using dCas9-targeted somatic 

hypermutation in mammalian cells. Nat. Methods 13, 1036–1042 (2016).

 41. Halperin, S. O. et al. CRISPR-guided DNA polymerases enable diversification 

of all nucleotides in a tunable window. Nature 560, 248–252 (2018).

 42. Esvelt, K. M., Carlson, J. C. & Liu, D. R. A system for the continuous directed 

evolution of biomolecules. Nature 472, 499–503 (2011).

618

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biology 43. Smeal, S. W., Schmitt, M. A., Pereira, R. R., Prasad, A. & Fisk, J. D. 

Simulation of the M13 life cycle I: assembly of a genetically-structured 
deterministic chemical kinetic simulation. Virology 500,  
259–274 (2017).

 44. Carlson, J. C., Badran, A. H., Guggiana-Nilo, D. A. & Liu, D. R. Negative 

selection and stringency modulation in phage-assisted continuous evolution. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 216–222 (2014).

 45. Dickinson, B. C., Packer, M. S., Badran, A. H. & Liu, D. R. A system for the 

continuous directed evolution of proteases rapidly reveals drug-resistance 
mutations. Nat. Commun. 5, 5352 (2014).

 46. Packer, M. S., Rees, H. A. & Liu, D. R. Phage-assisted continuous  

evolution of proteases with altered substrate specificity. Nat. Commun. 8,  
956 (2017).

 47. Badran, A. H. et al. Continuous evolution of Bacillus thuringiensis toxins 

overcomes insect resistance. Nature 533, 58–63 (2016).

 48. Wang, T., Badran, A. H., Huang, T. P. & Liu, D. R. Continuous directed 

evolution of proteins with improved soluble expression. Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 
972–980 (2018).

 49. Bryson, D. I. et al. Continuous directed evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA 

synthetases. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 1253–1260 (2017).

 50. Hubbard, B. P. et al. Continuous directed evolution of DNA-binding proteins 

to improve TALEN specificity. Nat. Methods 12, 939–942 (2015).

 51. Hu, J. H. et al. Evolved Cas9 variants with broad PAM compatibility and high 

DNA specificity. Nature 556, 57–63 (2018).

 52. Miller, S.M. et al. Continuous evolution of SpCas9 variants compatible with 

non-G PAMs. Nat. Biotechnol. (2020).

 53. Thuronyi, B.W. et al. Continuous evolution of base editors with expanded 

target compatibility and improved activity. Nat. Biotechnol. 37,  
1070–1079 (2019).

 54. Berman, C. M. et al. An adaptable platform for directed evolution in human 

cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 18093–18103 (2018).

 55. English, J. G. et al. VEGAS as a platform for facile directed evolution in 

mammalian cells. Cell 178, 748–761.e7 (2019).

 56. Butterfield, G. L. et al. Evolution of a designed protein assembly encapsulating 

its own RNA genome. Nature 552, 415–420 (2017).

 57. Voigt, C. A., Martinez, C., Wang, Z. G., Mayo, S. L. & Arnold, F. H.  

Protein building blocks preserved by recombination. Nat. Struct. Biol. 9, 
553–558 (2002).

 58. Wu, Z., Kan, S. B. J., Lewis, R. D., Wittmann, B. J. & Arnold, F. H. Machine 

learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial libraries.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 8852–8858 (2019).

 59. Wong, J. T. Membership mutation of the genetic code: loss of fitness by 

tryptophan. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 80, 6303–6306 (1983).

 60. Wang, L. & Schultz, P. G. A general approach for the generation of 

orthogonal tRNAs. Chem. Biol. 8, 883–890 (2001).

 61. Monk, J. W. et al. Rapid and inexpensive evaluation of nonstandard amino 

acid incorporation in Escherichia coli. ACS Synth. Biol. 6, 45–54 (2017).

 62. Hammerling, M. J. et al. Bacteriophages use an expanded genetic code on 
evolutionary paths to higher fitness. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 178–180 (2014).
 63. Drienovská, I., Mayer, C., Dulson, C. & Roelfes, G. A designer enzyme for 

hydrazone and oxime formation featuring an unnatural catalytic aniline 
residue. Nat. Chem. 10, 946–952 (2018).

 64. Mayer, C., Dulson, C., Reddem, E., Thunnissen, A. W. H. & Roelfes, G. 
Directed evolution of a designer enzyme featuring an unnatural catalytic 
amino acid. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 58, 2083–2087 (2019).

 65. Kanigowska, P., Shen, Y., Zheng, Y., Rosser, S. & Cai, Y. Smart DNA 

fabrication using sound waves: applying acoustic dispensing technologies to 
synthetic biology. J. Lab. Autom. 21, 49–56 (2016).

 66. Terekhov, S. S. et al. Microfluidic droplet platform for ultrahigh-throughput 

single-cell screening of biodiversity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,  
2550–2555 (2017).

 67. Wong, B. G., Mancuso, C. P., Kiriakov, S., Bashor, C. J. & Khalil, A. S. Precise, 

automated control of conditions for high-throughput growth of yeast and 
bacteria with eVOLVER. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 614–623 (2018).

 68. Callens, C. et al. A multiplex culture system for the long-term growth of 

fission yeast cells. Yeast 34, 343–355 (2017).

 69. Takahashi, C. N., Miller, A. W., Ekness, F., Dunham, M. J. & Klavins, E. A 

low cost, customizable turbidostat for use in synthetic circuit characterization. 
ACS Synth. Biol. 4, 32–38 (2015).

acknowledgements
D.R.L. gratefully acknowledges support from NIH U01 AI142756 (D.R.L.), RM1 
HG009490 (D.R.L.), R01 EB022376 (D.R.L.), and R35 GM118062 (D.R.L.); and HHMI 
(D.R.L.). We thank A. Badran and K. Zhao for their helpful comments.

Competing interests
D.R.L. is a consultant and co-founder of Prime Medicine, Beam Therapeutics, Pairwise 
Plants, and Editas Medicine, companies that use genome editing. Complete disclosures 
are available at https://liugroup.us.

additional information
Correspondence should be addressed to D.R.L.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature America, Inc. 2020

NaTuRe CheMiCaL BioLogy | VOL 16 | JUne 2020 | 610–619 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

619

PersPectiveNATure CHemiCAl Biology