pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Rosetta-Enabled Structural Prediction of Permissive Loop Insertion
Sites in Proteins
Joseph G. Plaks, Jeﬀ A. Brewer, Nicole K. Jacobsen, Michael McKenna, Joshua R. Uzarski,
Timothy J. Lawton, Shaun F. Filocamo, and Joel L. Kaar*

Cite This: Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Read Online

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

*sı Supporting Information

ABSTRACT: While loop motifs frequently play a major role in
protein function, our understanding of how to rationally engineer
proteins with novel loop domains remains limited. In the absence of
rational approaches,
loop domains often
the incorporation of
destabilizes proteins,
thereby requiring massive screening and
selection to identify sites that can accommodate loop insertion. We
developed a computational strategy for rapidly scanning the entire
structure of a scaﬀold protein to determine the impact of
loop
insertion at all possible amino acid positions. This approach is based
on the Rosetta kinematic loop modeling protocol and was
demonstrated by identifying sites in lipase that were permissive to
insertion of the LAP peptide. Interestingly, the identiﬁcation of permissive sites was dependent on the contribution of the residues in
the near-loop environment on the Rosetta score and did not correlate with conventional structural features (e.g., B-factors). As
evidence of this, several insertion sites (e.g., following residues 17, 47−49, and 108), which were predicted and conﬁrmed to be
permissive, interrupted helices, while others (e.g., following residues 43, 67, 116, 119, and 121), which are situated in loop regions,
were nonpermissive. This approach was further shown to be predictive for β-glucosidase and human phosphatase and tensin
homologue (PTEN), and to facilitate the engineering of insertion sites through in silico mutagenesis. By enabling the design of loop-
containing protein libraries with high probabilities of soluble expression, this approach has broad implications in many areas of
protein engineering, including antibody design, improving enzyme activity, and protein modiﬁcation.

L oop regions within proteins often contribute substantially

to function and thus are critical structural features. For
example, such regions frequently determine the binding
speciﬁcity of antibodies,1 modulate substrate recognition in
enzymatic catalysis,2,3 and serve as recognition sequences for
post-translational modiﬁcations.4 As such, altering or introduc-
ing peptide loops within a protein may generate novel
function.5,6 Indeed,
loop alterations have been observed in
enzyme evolution as a route by which enzymes within the same
family diversify.7 In protein engineering, the insertion of novel
loops within diverse protein targets has resulted in chimeric
molecules with multiple functions.8 This has been exempliﬁed
via the introduction of antibody-like loops into non-
immunoglobulin proteins to impart binding activity.9,10 Addi-
tionally, the insertion of peptides as recognition motifs for
enzymatic ligation reactions has also been widely reported to
facilitate chemical modiﬁcation.11

Despite the potential to introduce novel function through
peptide loop insertions, preventing the disruption of protein
structure and/or function remains a major challenge.12−14 In the
identiﬁcation of insertion sites, regions with high B-factors and
small amounts of secondary structure may be targeted for
modiﬁcation. However, these characteristics do not guarantee
loop accommodation. Moreover, highly ﬂexible regions that are

natively found in proteins, including the N- and C-termini, may
be critical for function and thus cannot be readily mutated. As
such, a more systematic approach to identifying and designing
loop insertion sites would represent a signiﬁcant advancement
over conventional approaches.

As a potential computational platform for predicting sites that
accommodate loop insertion, the Rosetta protein modeling
framework has intriguing potential.15−18 The Rosetta frame-
work, which has widespread utility for structure prediction and
protein design, has previously been used to create novel protein
chimeras.15,19−23 Additionally, Rosetta contains a loop modeling
feature (i.e., the kinematic loop modeling protocol) that can
incorporate short strands of amino acids within an existing
structure.24,25 This feature has been shown to be of considerable
utility for predicting the structure of unresolved regions in
crystal structures as well as in the context of homology modeling.

Received:
June 25, 2020
Revised:
September 12, 2020
Published: September 24, 2020

© 2020 American Chemical Society

3993

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Downloaded via UNIV OF MANCHESTER on August 10, 2021 at 11:50:55 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Despite these uses, the utility of the loop modeling protocol for
identifying sites that are permissive for loop insertion remains an
unexplored area.

The goal of this work was to develop and understand a
computational approach to identifying permissive sites in
protein scaﬀolds for loop insertion using the Rosetta loop
modeling feature. Speciﬁcally, we investigated the extent to
which this feature could be repurposed to accurately predict the
impact of loop insertion as a function of site on protein stability.
To investigate the repurposing of this feature, lipase A (lipA)
from Bacillus subtilis was used as a model protein scaﬀold.
Moreover, a 13-amino acid loop sequence, otherwise known as
the LAP sequence, which is a target recognition motif for the
enzyme lipoic acid ligase (LplA), was used as the model loop
sequence.26,27 The LAP sequence is of particular interest for
loop insertion given its utility for site-speciﬁc labeling and/or
modiﬁcation through post-translational modiﬁcation by LplA as
we and others have shown previously.28−30

Using a modiﬁed version of the Rosetta kinematic loop
modeling protocol, the LAP sequence was modeled at every
possible amino acid position in lipA. The predictive capability of
this Rosetta-based approach was validated by comparing Rosetta
scores with soluble expression of LAP-containing lipA
constructs. The extent to which this approach is general was
also investigated using β-glucosidase (Trichoderma reesei) and
human phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN).. To
understand this approach, the contribution of each component
of the Rosetta scoring function to the total score associated with
the insertion of LAP into lipA was analyzed. Finally, this
approach was used to engineer the residues surrounding a
desired insertion site and to predict how changes in these
residues impacted LAP accommodation. Our results ultimately
demonstrate the potential of this approach as a rapid and
computationally inexpensive method for scanning the impact of
loop insertion at every position in a protein scaﬀold as well as
engineering loop insertion sites in protein scaﬀolds to impart
speciﬁc functions.

■ MATERIALS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Materials. All primers and gBlock gene fragments were
purchased from IDT (San Jose, CA). All reagents, including
InVision His-tag IN-gel stain and restriction enzymes, were
obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc (Waltham, MA) unless
otherwise stated. Bis-acrylamide, Precision Plus Protein Dual
Color Standards (gel ladders), and all gel casting and running
materials were purchased from Bio-Rad.

Rosetta Modeling. Loop models were generated by calling
the loopmodel executable and by specifying threaded-PDB ﬁles
and loop ﬁles as inputs. Threaded-PDBs were generated by
downloading structure ﬁles from the Protein Data Bank (PDB)
(entries 1ISP for lipA, 3AHY for β-glucosidase, and 1D5R for
PTEN), isolating chain A from each of these ﬁles with the
clean_PDB Python script within the Rosetta package, and
threading a modiﬁed primary sequence containing the LAP
sequence onto the target protein structure with the
thread_PDB_from_alignment Python script. Alignment ﬁles
required for the thread_PDB_from_alignment script were
generated through the command line using Clustal W version
2.1 source code downloaded from clustal.org.31 Loop ﬁles
speciﬁed the residue directly preceding the LAP sequence as the
loop start residue and the residue directly following the LAP
sequence as the loop end residue.

Large populations of full-atom models were produced on the
Janus supercomputer by generating 21 models on 12 nodes and
performing this task a total of 12 times. Structural scans of
proteins using centroid modeling were performed by calling the
loopmodel executable for a set of input ﬁles speciﬁc to each
unique insertion site in an iterative manner. Ten models were
generated at each sterically accessible site. Accessible insertion
sites were deﬁned as those for which a single model could be
generated within a total of 150 build attempts. Point mutations
were modeled by threading an altered protein sequence
containing the point mutation onto the structure of the target
protein with the thread_PDB_from_alignment Python script
and performing centroid modeling on the LAP sequence as
described above.

Unique scores for each LAP insertion site were obtained by
averaging total scores from 10 centroid models. Scores for
isolated loops were calculated from the 10 output PDB ﬁles
generated during the structural scan of lipA, which contained the
LAP sequence in various conformations. All lipA residues were
removed from these ﬁles, and scores were recalculated by calling
the loopmodel executable with a loop ﬁle that speciﬁed two
adjacent residues as the loop start and loop end residues.
Changes in individual residue scores upon insertion of LAP were
calculated by extracting residue scores from output PDBs,
subtracting wild-type residue scores from model residue scores,
and averaging the diﬀerence across the 10 LAP-containing
models produced. Wild-type residue scores were calculated in a
manner similar to that for scores for isolated loops. Speciﬁcally,
the loopmodel executable was run with two adjacent residues
speciﬁed as the loop start and loop end residues in the loop ﬁle.
Delta scores for point mutations were calculated by subtracting
the average score for 10 models of the mutated LAP-lipA
construct by the background score of the mutated protein
scaﬀold without the LAP sequence. Background scores were
generated by threading the modiﬁed primary sequence
containing the point mutation onto the target protein scaﬀold
and by running the loopmodel executable with a loop ﬁle
specifying two adjacent residues as the loop start and loop end
residues. Insertion site B-factors were calculated by averaging
the α-carbon B-factors of the two residues on either side of the
inserted LAP sequence. Details of
the Rosetta protocols,
including scripts, used for structural scans are provided in the
Supporting Methods.

Cloning and Mutagenesis of LAP-Containing Con-
structs. LipA constructs were expressed from a pET21B+
plasmid that contained the lipA gene that had been ampliﬁed by
polymerase chain reaction from B. subtilis and cloned between
NdeI and SacI restriction sites (previously described).32 Excess
base pairs between the end of lipA and the start of the intrinsic
C-terminal polyhistidine tag (his-tag) coding sequence of the
plasmid were deleted via site-directed mutagenesis, resulting in
expression with a his-tag directly fused to each construct C-
terminus with no linker sequencer between them. β-Glucosidase
constructs were similarly expressed from a pET21B+ plasmid
with the β-glucosidase gene cloned between NdeI and XhoI
restriction sites. The β-glucosidase gene from T. reesei (NCBI
reference sequence XP_006963436.1) was synthesized by IDT
as a gBlock gene fragment that was codon optimized for
Escherichia coli expression. Translation resulted in a C-terminal
his-tag attached to the enzyme via a two-residue linker, which
corresponded to additional base pairs associated with the XhoI
restriction site. The PTEN gene (GenBank entry U92436.1)

3994

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

was also synthesized by IDT as a gBlock gene fragment and
cloned into the pET28A plasmid as described previously.33
LAP−protein constructs were produced either via site-
directed mutagenesis using large insertion primers to add the
LAP sequence (as described previously)30 or by ordering a
complete IDT gBlock gene fragment that contained the LAP
sequence in the desired location while otherwise maintaining the
exact DNA sequence as the construct used as a wild-type
reference. LAP-containing gBlock fragments were then cloned
into the appropriate plasmid as described above. The same DNA
sequence, GGC TTC GAG ATC GAC AAG GTG TGG TAC
GAC CTG GAC GCC, was used to encode the LAP sequence in
all circumstances. Point mutations in LAP−lipA constructs were
made using QuikChange Lightning mutagenesis kits. Upon
sequencing, all plasmids were transformed in BL21 (DE3) E. coli
cells for expression.
Expression of LAP−Protein Libraries. Test expressions
for all protein libraries were performed in a 96-well plate format
with 2 mL capacity wells. Brieﬂy, glycerol stock plates were used
to seed overnight culture plates using a multichannel pipet with
sterile pipet tips. Each well in the overnight culture plate was
ﬁlled with 1.8 mL of LB-amp (or LB-kan for pET28A-PTEN
plasmids) before inoculation. Culture plates were grown
overnight at 37 °C while being shaken at 200 rpm. The
following day, fresh plates containing 1.8 mL of LB-antibiotic
per well were inoculated with 30 μL of an overnight culture.
Cultures were grown until an optical density (OD600) of 0.6 was
reached. Culture plates were cooled to the appropriate
expression temperature (37 °C for lipA constructs, 25 °C for
β-glucosidase constructs, and 13, 25, or 37 °C for PTEN
constructs), which was followed by the addition of 30 μL of an
LB/antibiotic/IPTG (isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside)
solution to each well, resulting in a ﬁnal IPTG concentration of 1
mM. Plates were incubated at the appropriate temperature
overnight (16 h) at 200 rpm. Cells were then pelleted by
centrifugation at 1100g for 20 min. The LB supernatant was
decanted, and cell pellets were resuspended and lysed via
incubation in 150 μL of BugBuster Master Mix (MilliporeSigma,
Burlington, MA) supplemented with a protease inhibitor for 20
min. Following lysis, samples from two identical pellets were
pooled and 50 μL was transferred to a microfuge tube containing
30 μL of 4× sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) loading buﬀer and 40
μL of his-tagged green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP), which was
included as an internal standard (prepared as previously
described).30 SDS solutions were incubated at 95 °C and
saved as total protein samples. Pooled lysates were then cleared
via centrifugation at 13000g for 5 min. The supernatant was
transferred into new tubes containing 4× SDS loading dye and
GFP and treated as described above to produce soluble
expression samples. The protein concentration in the insoluble
fraction was measured by resolubilizing the pellet containing the
cell debris in 200 μL of 10% SDS. Resolubilized material was
then transferred into new tubes containing 4× SDS loading dye
and treated as described above to produce insoluble samples. All
samples were prepared and analyzed in triplicate.

Densitometry Measurements of Protein Expression.
Protein constructs were initially separated on 12% acrylamide
sodium dodecyl sulfate−polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS−PAGE) gels at 150 V for 55 min. After running, gels
were ﬁxed in a 10% acetic acid/50% ethanol solution for 1 h.
Fixed gels were rinsed with water for 20 min and incubated in
InVision stain, which binds to his-tagged proteins, containing 30
mM imidazole overnight at room temperature while being

gently shaken. The following day, the InVision stain was
removed and gels were destained in 20 mM sodium phosphate
buﬀer (pH 7.8) over the course of 24 h while exchanging the
buﬀer at least three times. Destained gels were imaged on a GE
Typhoon FLA 9500 laser scanner with an excitation wavelength
of 532 nm. The intensities of the bands for the constructs in each
lane were analyzed via densitometry using ImageJ.34 An internal
GFP standard of known concentration was used to normalize
the amount of soluble protein for each construct. Expression
values for point mutants of the site 43 LAP−lipA construct as
well as for PTEN constructs were generated in terms of total
protein (fraction soluble) by normalizing soluble protein
measurements with total protein measurements.
Characterization of LAP-Containing lipA 41, 47, and
52 Constructs. LAP−lipA constructs with LAP sequences at
sites 41, 47, and 52 were expressed in 2 L cultures of LB-Amp
overnight at 13 °C after induction with 1 mM IPTG. After
sonication, the cell lysate was cleared via centrifugation and
vacuum ﬁltration with a 0.2 μm cutoﬀ ﬁlter, and protein was
puriﬁed on a Ni-NTA column. Puriﬁed protein was dialyzed
overnight into 20 mM sodium phosphate buﬀer (pH 7.0), ﬂash-
frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C. The speciﬁc
activity was assayed in 20 mM sodium phosphate buﬀer (pH
7.0) using 4-nitrophenyl butyrate (MilliporeSigma) as a
substrate at a ﬁnal concentration of 3 mM. Activity was
measured by quantifying the absorption of 4-nitrophenolate at
412 nm as a function of time. For speciﬁc activity measurements,
the protein concentration was determined via absorbance at 280
nm using the theoretical extinction coeﬃcient, which was
calculated from protein primary sequences with ProtParam.35
Additionally, circular dichroism (CD) spectra were recorded
using a 1 mm cuvette at room temperature with an Applied
Photophysics Chirascan Plus CD Spectrometer with an average
of at least ﬁve scans per construct. The composition of α-helices,
β-sheets, and random coils was calculated from circular
dichroism spectra using the http://perry.freeshell.org/
raussens.html web server.36
■ RESULTS

Basis for the Rosetta Modeling Approach. As a ﬁrst step
in demonstrating the use of the Rosetta loop modeling feature
for predicting permissive sites for loop insertion, the LAP motif
was modeled in various sites in lipA. The kinematic loop
modeling protocol consists of an initial centroid (i.e., coarse-
grained) stage, which is followed by a full-atom modeling (i.e.,
reﬁnement) stage.37 Rather than explicitly modeling the impact
of a LAP insertion on the structure of lipA, we explored a new
approach whereby the Rosetta score from the centroid stage
would be used to infer the impact of the LAP insertion without
modeling it directly. This approach would eliminate the full-
atom stage and thus reduce the computational time required to
model the LAP sequence at diverse sites within the structure of a
target protein. By purposely ignoring the structure of the loop,
this approach is agonistic to the loop itself and may, in principle,
be used to model the impact of loops that are natively structured
(such as those that are critical to function in enzymes and
antibodies) as well as unstructured on the stability of the protein
scaﬀold. To highlight the decrease in computational time
aﬀorded by eliminating the full-atom stage, we generated 3000
full-atom models of the LAP sequence inserted between residues
13 and 14 of lipA and compared the results to a native loop in
lipA (residues 7−19) that we remodeled. Even upon generation
of 3000 full-atom models, the LAP sequence failed to converge

3995

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Figure 1. Overview of the Rosetta loop modeling approach. (a) Schematic of the process for scoring every possible insertion site within a protein
scaﬀold. (b) Distribution of Rosetta energy scores for all possible LAP insertion sites in lipA. Bars are colored according to score from yellow, which
represents sites with more negative energy scores, to dark purple, which represents sites with less negative energy scores. A representative 95%
conﬁdence interval (CI) for 10 models produced at a single LAP insertion site is shown in the top left corner. The large distribution of scores for all
insertion sites relative to this representative CI indicates that scores can be used to reproducibly diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent insertion sites within a
single structure. (c) Projection of Rosetta energy scores on the structure of lipA. Residues are colored using the same coloring scheme as in panel b.
Sites that are colored gray correspond to those for which Rosetta energy scores could not be determined.

on a single conformational state as generally occurs when
generating thousands of models of a structured loop (Figure S1),
suggesting that the number of full-atom models required for
convergence would be much larger. As such, convergence of the
LAP sequence becomes intractable computationally if the goal is
to scan a large number of potential insertion sites as was the case
here. Additionally, while it would be computationally expensive
to reach convergence for all of the loops in lipA, some loops may
have more than one local free energy minimum, as observed with
the native (i.e., control) loop, which in turn would further
complicate the characterization of loop insertion sites with full-
atom modeling.

Having eliminated the full-atom modeling stage, we explored
the potential to further decrease the computational time by
characterizing loop insertion sites with average Rosetta scores
obtained from a small number of models. To do so, we
compared average Rosetta scores from 10 centroid models to
those obtained from 2500 centroid models for LAP insertions at
sites 13, 53, and 108 (note that the site number refers to the
residue at which the LAP sequence is inserted immediately after;
e.g., site 13 refers to the insertion of the LAP sequence between
residues 13 and 14). These sites were chosen given that they
represented sites with a low, medium, and high average Rosetta
score from the initial 10 centroid models. As shown in Table S1,
the average Rosetta scores from samples of 2500 centroid
models for all three sites were within 95% conﬁdence intervals
calculated from only 10 centroid models. As such, this supports
the use of the mean of only 10 models for the characterization of
individual
insertion sites. Given this, hereafter, all scores
represent the mean calculated from 10 centroid models and
are in terms of Rosetta energy units (REU).

Upon omission of the full-atom stage of the loop modeling
protocol and generation of only 10 models per loop insertion
site, it was feasible to rapidly scan all possible insertion sites in a
protein scaﬀold without a computing cluster or supercomputer.

The feasibility of this was demonstrated by modeling the LAP
sequence in every position in lipA as illustrated schematically in
Figure 1a. Initially, input sequence ﬁles for all 178 possible
insertion sites were created using the sequence associated with
the crystal structure of lipA in the PDB (entry 1ISP). After the
sequence ﬁles had been created, 10 centroid models were
generated for each site, yielding an average Rosetta energy score
and 95% conﬁdence interval. Notably, although modeling was
performed at all 178 sites, scores were obtained only for sites on
the surface of
lipA where there was suﬃcient space to
accommodate the LAP sequence (i.e., without sterically clashing
with neighboring residues). In total, we obtained successful
models for 86 unique insertion sites, which had a broad
distribution of scores (Figure 1b). Given the range of this
distribution relative to typical 95% conﬁdence intervals obtained
for individual insertion sites, the predicted scores suggested that
the extent to which sites were permissive varied signiﬁcantly and
that this variation could be reproducibly captured by our
modeling approach. Interestingly, mapping scores for each site
onto the structure of lipA revealed that many sites that were
predicted to be permissive to LAP insertion were unintuitive
(Figure 1c). For example, several sites that were predicted to be
permissive (i.e., had large negative scores) were located in
regions with helical secondary structure. Moreover, many sites
that were predicted to be nonpermissive (i.e., had small negative
scores) were in regions with irregular secondary structure that
would seemingly be permissive.

Validation of Model Predictions for LAP Insertion
Sites. To validate the modeling approach, the Rosetta score for
35 LAP-containing lipA constructs was compared to the amount
of soluble protein expressed for each construct in E. coli. We
hypothesized that soluble expression (Figure 2a) would
correlate with Rosetta score because constructs with small
negative scores would presumably be unstable and thus
aggregation-prone, whereas constructs with large negative

3996

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Figure 2. Analysis and validation of Rosetta energy scores from a structural scan of lipA. (a) In-gel SDS−PAGE ﬂuorescent image of the soluble
fraction of each LAP-containing lipA construct. (b) Correlation of the level of relative soluble expression with [D]50 from guanidinium chloride
denaturation (left), fraction random coil (middle), and speciﬁc activity (right) of three LAP−lipA constructs with LAP insertions at sites 41, 47, and
52. Relative soluble expression refers to the ratio of the soluble expression of each LAP-containing lipA construct to that of wild-type lipA. [D]50 and the
fraction random coil were quantiﬁed via circular dichroism. (c) Correlation of the soluble expression of LAP-containing lipA constructs and Rosetta
energy scores. (d) Analysis of the soluble expression of LAP-containing lipA constructs as a function of the B-factor insertion site. (e) Soluble
expression and Rosetta energy scores ordered by insertion site within the primary sequence of lipA. (f) Location of LAP insertion sites (shown as
spheres) in speciﬁc regions of lipA. The color of the spheres, which is indicative of score, is consistent with the color for each site in panels c and e.

scores would presumably be stable and thus soluble when
expressed. Indeed, constructs that were poorly expressed in the
soluble fraction were observed in the insoluble fraction (Figure
S2), suggesting that stability, rather than translational eﬃciency,
strongly contributed to the apparent extent of soluble
expression. Additionally, such a dependence of soluble
expression on stability was shown for three puriﬁed LAP-
containing lipA constructs (with LAP insertions at sites 41, 47,
and 52), which had varying levels of soluble expression (Figure
2b, left panel, and Figure S3a). As further evidence of this
dependence, soluble expression was also found to correlate with
the retention of secondary structure and speciﬁc activity for
these constructs (Figure 2b, middle and right panels, and Figure
S3b).

Remarkably, upon comparison of soluble expression for all 35
constructs to Rosetta scores, a strong correlation was observed
(Figure 2c). Speciﬁcally, seven of the nine lowest-scoring
constructs from the library were found to express in the soluble
fraction. Moreover, of these seven, the level of soluble expression
for ﬁve of them exceeded 50% of the expression of wild-type lipA
(i.e., the level of soluble expression relative to wild-type lipA was
>0.5). Conversely, of the constructs with the 26 highest scores,

only six of them expressed in the soluble fraction at an
appreciable level, and the levels of soluble expression for these
constructs tended to be quite low with none exceeding 50% of
wild-type expression levels. While the extent to which a site was
permissive could not be inferred from the absolute Rosetta
score, these data indicate that this approach was useful for
identifying sites that were likely to be more permissive than
others. Interestingly, Rosetta scores were found to be more
predictive of LAP accommodation than local B-factors, which
did not appear to correlate with soluble expression (Figure 2d).
Rather, of the sites tested, accommodation of the LAP sequence
tended to correlate with lower B-factors. Speciﬁcally, 92% of
constructs with measurable soluble expression were found
within the lower 69th percentile of B-factor measurements for all
constructs that were characterized. This observation was
particularly interesting given it has previously been shown that
single-point mutations are generally less destabilizing in regions
with larger relative B-factors.38

Upon analysis of the Rosetta score and soluble expression as a
function of residue number (Figure 2e), the ability of Rosetta to
capture diﬀerences between neighboring sites became further
apparent. This was particularly apparent in comparing the

3997

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Figure 3. Analysis and validation of Rosetta energy scores from a structural scan of β-glucosidase. (a) Projection of Rosetta energy scores on the
structure of β-glucosidase using the same color scheme as in previous ﬁgures. (b) Soluble expression vs Rosetta energy score for select LAP-containing
β-glucosidase constructs. (c) Soluble expression vs LAP insertion site B-factor. (d) Soluble protein expression and Rosetta energy scores for each LAP-
containing β-glucosidase construct ordered by insertion site in the primary sequence of β-glucosidase. (e) Location of LAP insertion sites (shown as
spheres) in speciﬁc regions of β-glucosidase, which are colored according to their scores.

Rosetta scores for lipA constructs containing LAP insertions at
sites 41 and 43. Despite being nearly adjacent and within the
same loop (Figure 2f), these sites had very diﬀerent Rosetta
scores, which was consistent with the large diﬀerence in soluble
expression. Notably, through this approach, we identiﬁed several
sites in addition to site 43, including 67, 116, 119, and 121, that
were in loop regions and nonpermissive. Given that loop regions
are generally presumed to be permissive to mutation, this
highlights the diﬃculty in predicting sites that can accommodate
loop insertions as well as the need for approaches such as that
demonstrated here. As further evidence of this need, several sites
that interrupted helices, including 17, 47−49, and 108, were
both predicted and conﬁrmed to be permissive. Such sites were
similarly unintuitive on the basis of secondary structure given
that sites within ordered regions are generally presumed to be
nonpermissive to mutation. Interestingly, although several false
positives (i.e., sites with large negative scores but low levels of
soluble expression) were observed, virtually all of the false
positives were localized to the C-terminal end of the protein (i.e.,
residues 133−167). A possible explanation for this is that the
insertion of the LAP sequence in this region interferes with an

aspect of nascent lipA folding in a way that is not captured by this
modeling approach.39

To also show that this approach could be extended to other
proteins, we scanned the structure of β-glucosidase for
permissive LAP insertion sites using our computational
approach (Figure 3a). As with lipA, a correlation between
soluble expression and Rosetta energy score was observed,
whereby, in general, constructs with lower scores were more
likely to yield soluble protein (Figure 3b). Additionally, like for
lipA, the correlation between soluble expression and Rosetta
energy score was more apparent than that between soluble
expression and the B-factor (Figure 3c). In the case of the B-
factor, it is interesting that the constructs that expressed to an
appreciable level have intermediate B-factors and, moreover, are
clustered within a very narrow range of B-factors. This may be
explained by the observation that the sites that were permissive
to LAP insertion were located on the same face of the enzyme
where the ﬂexibility in the backbone is similar. It is also
noteworthy that most of the constructs tested did not yield any
soluble protein, suggesting β-glucosidase has a low tolerance to
the insertion of LAP overall. Nevertheless, as for lipA, the

3998

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Figure 4. Impact of the local residue environment in lipA on LAP accommodation. (a) Correlation between the sum of the env and pair terms with
total scores for all LAP-containing lipA constructs expressed (left) as well as for LAP sequence in the absence of lipA (right). (b) Overlay of three
individual models of the LAP sequence (blue) inserted at site 43 in lipA showing notable residues (D43, K44, and T47) in the near-loop environment.
(c) Rosetta energy scores for residues in the near-loop environment (gray) as well as in the LAP sequence (blue). (d−f) Impact of in silico mutagenesis
of K44, D43, and T47 on the Rosetta energy scores for the lipA construct with the LAP sequence inserted at site 43 (left). Also shown is the correlation
between the Rosetta energy score and soluble expression for select mutants (right). Rosetta scores for expressed mutants are colored gray in the left
panel.

Rosetta energy scores were especially predictive locally within
particular regions of the protein (Figure 3d). Furthermore, site
175 in β-glucosidase, which interrupted a helix, was both
predicted and found to be permissive in β-glucosidase,
reinforcing the notion that Rosetta scores can predict permissive
sites that are unintuitive based on secondary structure.

Structural Determinants of LAP Accommodation. In
light of some of the predictions being unintuitive, it is interesting
to consider what features of these sites were captured in the
modeling approach that otherwise would be missed. This
question was addressed by deconvoluting the individual
components of Rosetta’s centroid energy function and
examining the impact of each component on the overall score
(Figure S4 and Table S2). Strikingly, analysis of the contribution
of each component of the scoring function revealed that
diﬀerences in total scores for the LAP-containing lipA constructs
could be recapitulated by the summation of only two terms, env
and pair (Figure 4a, left panel). The env and pair terms reﬂect
the hydrophobic and electrostatic environments for each
residue, respectively, and,
the
environment for a given residue. In the case of LAP insertion,
the presence of the loop may alter the environment for residues
around the insertion site (i.e., in the near-loop environment),
which locally destabilize the protein scaﬀold.

the favorability of

in turn,

The dominance of the env and pair terms indicates that
diﬀerences in total scores observed between insertion sites
resulted from diﬀerent residue environments that were created

upon loop insertion. To illustrate the role of the env and pair
terms in capturing diﬀerences in the residue environment
proximal to the insertion site, the LAP sequence was rescored in
the absence of the enzyme scaﬀold. In this case, the LAP
sequence was removed from the enzyme scaﬀold at select sites
and the score of the loop was determined in isolation. As
expected, when scored in isolation, the summation of the env
and pair terms no longer correlated with the total score from the
Rosetta centroid modeling approach (Figure 4a, right panel). In
broader terms, our results from this analysis underscore the
importance of residue environment over more conventional
structural features, including secondary structure, Ramachan-
dran constraints, B-factor, and residue and/or atom packing.
Although these factors were clearly less important than the
residue environment for modeling LAP insertion sites, such
factors may play a more signiﬁcant role in identifying permissive
sites for loops that have more deﬁned secondary structure. It is
also plausible that some loops may form noncovalent
interactions (i.e., H-bonds or salt bridges) with residues
proximal to the insertion site that stabilize the loop and/or
protein scaﬀold. In these cases, other approaches, including full-
atom modeling, may be critical for predicting the extent to which
a site is permissive.

Given the importance of residues in the near-loop environ-
ment for determining accommodation, we hypothesized that
this understanding could be used to rationally engineer sites that
were nominally nonpermissive to be amenable to LAP insertion.

3999

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

Speciﬁcally, this may be achieved by mutating residues around
the insertion site that are destabilized by the LAP sequence, and
eﬀectively replacing these residues with a diﬀerent residue on
which the insertion of the LAP sequence has less of a detrimental
impact. To test this hypothesis, we examined the impact of LAP
insertion at site 43 in lipA on the REU for residues adjacent (i.e.,
within approximately 8−10 Å) to the loop (Figure 4b). On the
basis of analysis of the change in Rosetta score (i.e., ΔScore) for
each residue upon LAP insertion (compared to that in the
absence of the LAP sequence), K44, D43, and T47 were
destabilized the most of the residues near the insertion site that
were solvent-exposed (Figure 4c). Through in silico saturation
mutagenesis, we subsequently investigated the residue prefer-
ence at each of these sites by calculating ΔScore for all plausible
amino acid substitutions excluding proline (Figure 4d−f, left
panel). Interestingly, diﬀerent chemical preferences were
predicted at diﬀerent residue positions, with hydrophobic
residues being preferred at sites 44 and 47, and polar residues
being preferred at site 43. Experimental characterization of select
mutants from each site showed a strong correlation between
soluble protein expression and ΔScore. Signiﬁcantly, Rosetta
scores correctly predicted both increases and decreases in the
extent to which the sites were permissive to LAP insertion.
Taken together, these data illustrate that, using our modeling
approach, loop insertion sites may be “re-designed” to both
modulate and improve loop accommodation.

Characterization of LAP Insertion Sites in PTEN for
Intracellular Labeling. An intriguing application of
this
approach is the ﬂuorescent labeling of proteins intracellularly
(e.g., for monitoring protein traﬃcking) that cannot be labeled
at their termini. In such cases, our approach to identifying
nonterminal sites that are permissive to the LAP sequence may
be used to introduce the loop motif, which can subsequently be
labeled with a ﬂuorescent tag through the activity of LplA. An
example of such a case in which it is of considerable interest to
monitor protein traﬃcking involves the tumor suppressor
protein, PTEN. Notably, the localization of PTEN is believed
to involve an N-terminal membrane binding domain as well as a
C-terminal PDZ binding domain, which interacts with a
membrane-associated protein complex.40 Given the physio-
logical importance of the N- and C-terminal domains of PTEN,
the labeling of these domains may disrupt traﬃcking of PTEN,
thereby resulting in the accumulation of PTEN in non-native
cellular locations. As a proof of concept for this application, we
used our approach to identify potential labeling sites within
PTEN (Figure S5a). Notably, when we expressed LAP-
containing PTEN constructs that were predicted to be stable
in E. coli, we found that almost all of them expressed at >50% of
wild-type PTEN levels at 37 °C, and all expressed at >50% of
wild-type levels at lower induction temperatures (Figure S5b).
■ DISCUSSION

The ability to correctly identify permissive loop insertion sites
within the structure of a protein scaﬀold has the potential to
accelerate the design and application of chimeric molecules with
unique and useful properties. Toward this end, we have adapted
the kinematic loop modeling application within the Rosetta
framework to rapidly identify permissive loop insertion sites in
proteins. Our approach, which ranks each site by taking the
average of a small sample of centroid models, uses Rosetta scores
to infer the impact of loop insertions on protein stability without
explicitly modeling the structure of the scaﬀold. As a result,
scanning a protein scaﬀold using this approach is computation-

ally inexpensive and thus readily feasible without
computing resources.

large

With our approach, permissive insertion sites were identiﬁed
in lipA and β-glucosidase that were highly unintuitive based on
secondary structure and local B-factor measurements. The
ability to identify these sites a priori was derived from the large
contribution that residues in the near-loop environment made
within the centroid energy function and highlights the
underappreciated role that local residues play in determining
the permissiveness of a loop insertion site. The importance of
these residues was conﬁrmed by mutagenesis (in silico and
experimental), which also demonstrated the utility of our
approach for redesigning insertion sites to improve loop
accommodation. Additionally,
that near-loop
residues have on predictions from our approach explains why
correlations were stronger when considered locally within
certain regions.

the impact

The success of our approach in comparison to other widely
used metrics for predicting mutational plasticity, such as B-
factor, is particularly striking. While it is generally intuitive to
identify sites that can accommodate single-residue insertions,
deletions, and mutations based on backbone B-factors, this is not
the case with larger loop insertions as our ﬁndings show.
Speciﬁcally, whereas single-residue insertions, deletions, and
mutations are generally accommodated at highly ﬂexible sites
with high B-factors, our results indicate that the extent to which a
site accommodates the insertion of a large loop in fact does not
correlate strongly with the B-factor. It is possible that this
diﬀerence in the predictive capability of B-factors reﬂects a
regime change that occurs as loop insertions become larger.
While single-residue insertions are generally accommodated and
are less deleterious to protein stability at ﬂexible sites, in our
work, we ﬁnd that large loops are rarely accommodated, and
accommodation depends less on site ﬂexibility and more on the
residue compatibility in the near-loop environment. One
possible explanation for this is the fact that small amounts of
ﬂexibility as inferred from B-factors are suﬃcient to counteract
small structural perturbations associated with single-residue
changes, but that compatibility of the greater residue environ-
ment is more important when larger changes such as loop
insertions are made.

Although regions with high B-factors are intuitive targets for
protein engineering given trends observed with mutational
plasticity, any attempt to use B-factors to predict engineerable
sites in proteins is complicated by the potential impact that
crystal contacts, structural resolution, and reﬁnement may have
on B-factor values.41 Our results with B-factor trends, therefore,
do not rule out the possibility that other aspects of structural
intuition may be used in conjunction with our Rosetta approach
to further streamline the identiﬁcation of permissive LAP
insertion sites. For example, although numerous instances of
LAP accommodation within α-helices were observed, which are
themselves unintuitive, these sites tended to reside near helix
termini (within one or two turns of the helix). We did not ﬁnd
the accommodation of sites deep within α-helices in any of the
proteins that we studied. Likewise, we did not identify any stable
LAP insertion sites that interrupted β-strands. These observa-
tions are consistent with structural intuition, and it is possible
that they may be useful in making educated decisions that
streamline our approach. In particular, one might imagine
feeding input structures through an initial algorithm that quickly
removed insertion sites from consideration whenever those sites
occurred within α-helices at positions that are far from the helix

4000

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

termini, within β-strands, or buried deeply in the interior of the
protein. Such a ﬁltering step based on intuition and supported by
observations in this work would further decrease the computa-
tional
time associated with identifying accommodation of
insertion sites without sacriﬁcing much in the way of
overlooking accommodating sites.

As shown with lipA, β-glucosidase, and PTEN, our approach
serves as a general, simple, and rapid platform for identifying and
rationally redesigning loop insertion sites in target scaﬀolds.
This approach is particularly useful for guiding the design of
loop-containing protein libraries with high probabilities of
soluble expression in the context of engineering protein
function. The rational design of such libraries,
for which
methods are currently lacking, will ultimately have broad
implications in many areas of protein engineering, including
antibody design,
improving enzyme activity, and protein
modiﬁcation.

■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533.

Detailed description of Rosetta protocols,
full-atom
modeling of LAP sequence, SDS−PAGE gel of the
insoluble fraction of LAP−lipA constructs, CD analysis of
LAP−lipA constructs with and without chemical
denaturation, correlation of total Rosetta centroid energy
score with individual terms in energy function, Rosetta
prediction and characterization of LAP−PTEN con-
structs, statistical analysis of the diﬀerence in the Rosetta
centroid energy score for 2500 and 10 models, and
statistical analysis of the correlation between the Rosetta
centroid energy score and terms in energy function
(PDF)

Accession Codes
Lipoic acid ligase (LplA), UniProtKB P32099; B. subtilis lipase A
(lipA), UniProtKB P37957; T. reesei β-glucosidase, UniProtKB
A0A090ASX1; human phosphatase and tensin homologue
(PTEN), UniProtKB P60484.

■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Joel L. Kaar − Department of Chemical and Biological

Corresponding Author

Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
80309, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-0794-3955;
Phone: (303) 492-6031; Email: joel.kaar@colorado.edu;
Fax: (303) 492-4341

Authors

Joseph G. Plaks − Department of Chemical and Biological

Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
80309, United States

Jeﬀ A. Brewer − Department of Chemical and Biological

Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
80309, United States
Nicole K. Jacobsen − Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
80309, United States

Michael McKenna − Department of Chemical and Biological

Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
80309, United States

Joshua R. Uzarski − U.S. Army Combat Capabilities

Development Command Soldier Center, Natick, Massachusetts
01760, United States;

orcid.org/0000-0002-5971-1670

Timothy J. Lawton − U.S. Army Combat Capabilities

Development Command Soldier Center, Natick, Massachusetts
01760, United States

Shaun F. Filocamo − U.S. Army Combat Capabilities

Development Command Soldier Center, Natick, Massachusetts
01760, United States

Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533

Funding
Funding for this work was provided by the U.S. Army Combat
Capabilities Development Command (CCDC) Soldier Center
and the U.S. Army Research Oﬃce through Grant W911NF-15-
1-0141.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.

■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work utilized the Janus supercomputer, which is supported
by the National Science Foundation (Grant CNS-0821794), the
University of Colorado, Boulder, the University of Colorado,
Denver, and the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
The authors kindly thank Deanne Sammond for advice,
encouragement, and helpful discussion.

■ REFERENCES

(1) Rini, J. M., Schulze-Gahmen, U., and Wilson, I. A. (1992)
Structural evidence for induced fit as a mechanism for antibody-antigen
recognition. Science 255, 959−965.
(2) Ramasubbu, N., Ragunath, C., and Mishra, P. J. (2003) Probing
the Role of a Mobile Loop in Substrate Binding and Enzyme Activity of
Human Salivary Amylase. J. Mol. Biol. 325, 1061−1076.
(3) Saraste, M., Sibbald, P. R., and Wittinghofer, A. (1990) The P-loop
 a common motif in ATP- and GTP-binding proteins. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 15, 430−434.
(4) Adams, J. A. (2003) Activation Loop Phosphorylation and
Catalysis in Protein Kinases: Is There Functional Evidence for the
Autoinhibitor Model? Biochemistry 42, 601−607.
(5) Boersma, Y. L., Pijning, T., Bosma, M. S., van der Sloot, A. M.,
Godinho, L. F., Dröge, M. J., Winter, R. T., van Pouderoyen, G.,
Dijkstra, B. W., and Quax, W. J. (2008) Loop Grafting of Bacillus
subtilis Lipase A: Inversion of Enantioselectivity. Chem. Biol. 15, 782−
789.
(6) Liu, X., Taylor, R. D., Griffin, L., Coker, S.-F., Adams, R., Ceska, T.,
Shi, J., Lawson, A. D. G., and Baker, T. (2017) Computational design of
an epitope-specific Keap1 binding antibody using hotspot residues
grafting and CDR loop swapping. Sci. Rep. 7, 41306.
(7) Tawfik, D. S. (2006) Loop Grafting and the Origins of Enzyme
Species. Science 311, 475−476.
(8) Park, H.-S., Nam, S.-H., Lee, J. K., Yoon, C. N., Mannervik, B.,
Benkovic, S. J., and Kim, H.-S. (2006) Design and Evolution of New
Catalytic Activity with an Existing Protein Scaffold. Science 311, 535−
538.
(9) Binz, H. K., Amstutz, P., and Pluckthun, A. (2005) Engineering
novel binding proteins from nonimmunoglobulin domains. Nat.
Biotechnol. 23, 1257−1268.
(10) Kiss, C., Fisher, H., Pesavento, E., Dai, M., Valero, R., Ovecka, M.,
Nolan, R., Phipps, M. L., Velappan, N., Chasteen, L., Martinez, J. S.,
Waldo, G. S., Pavlik, P., and Bradbury, A. R. M. (2006) Antibody
binding loop insertions as diversity elements. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
e132.

4001

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

Biochemistry

pubs.acs.org/biochemistry

Article

(11) Plaks, J. G., and Kaar, J. L. (2019) in Lipoic Acid Ligase-Promoted
Bioorthogonal Protein Modiﬁcation and Immobilization BT - Enzyme-
Mediated Ligation Methods (Nuijens, T., and Schmidt, M., Eds.) pp
279−297, Springer New York, New York.
(12) Batori, V., Koide, A., and Koide, S. (2002) Exploring the potential
of the monobody scaffold: effects of loop elongation on the stability of a
fibronectin type III domain. Protein Eng., Des. Sel. 15, 1015−1020.
(13) Nagi, A. D., and Regan, L. (1997) An inverse correlation between
loop length and stability in a four-helix-bundle protein. Folding Des. 2,
67−75.
(14) Wang, L., Rivera, E. V., Benavides-Garcia, M. G., and Nall, B. T.
(2005) Loop Entropy and Cytochrome c Stability. J. Mol. Biol. 353,
719−729.
(15) Azoitei, M. L., Correia, B. E., Ban, Y.-E. A., Carrico, C.,
Kalyuzhniy, O., Chen, L., Schroeter, A., Huang, P.-S., McLellan, J. S.,
Kwong, P. D., Baker, D., Strong, R. K., and Schief, W. R. (2011)
Computation-Guided Backbone Grafting of a Discontinuous Motif
onto a Protein Scaffold. Science 334, 373−376.
(16) Weitzner, B. D., Jeliazkov, J. R., Lyskov, S., Marze, N., Kuroda, D.,
Frick, R., Adolf-Bryfogle, J., Biswas, N., Dunbrack, R. L., and Gray, J. J.
(2017) Modeling and docking of antibody structures with Rosetta. Nat.
Protoc. 12, 401−416.
(17) Weitzner, B. D., Kuroda, D., Marze, N., Xu, J., and Gray, J. J.
(2014) Blind prediction performance of RosettaAntibody 3.0: Grafting,
relaxation, kinematic loop modeling, and full CDR optimization.
Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 82, 1611−1623.
(18) Azoitei, M. L., Ban, Y.-E. A., Julien, J.-P., Bryson, S., Schroeter, A.,
Kalyuzhniy, O., Porter, J. R., Adachi, Y., Baker, D., Pai, E. F., and Schief,
W. R. (2012) Computational Design of High-Affinity Epitope Scaffolds
by Backbone Grafting of a Linear Epitope. J. Mol. Biol. 415, 175−192.
(19) Siegel, J. B., Zanghellini, A., Lovick, H. M., Kiss, G., Lambert, A.
R., St. Clair, J. L., Gallaher, J. L., Hilvert, D., Gelb, M. H., Stoddard, B. L.,
Houk, K. N., Michael, F. E., and Baker, D. (2010) Computational
Design of an Enzyme Catalyst for a Stereoselective Bimolecular Diels-
Alder Reaction. Science 329, 309−313.
(20) Röthlisberger, D., Khersonsky, O., Wollacott, A. M., Jiang, L.,
DeChancie, J., Betker, J., Gallaher, J. L., Althoff, E. A., Zanghellini, A.,
Dym, O., Albeck, S., Houk, K. N., Tawfik, D. S., and Baker, D. (2008)
Kemp elimination catalysts by computational enzyme design. Nature
453, 190−195.
(21) Bhardwaj, G., Mulligan, V. K., Bahl, C. D., Gilmore, J. M., Harvey,
P. J., Cheneval, O., Buchko, G. W., Pulavarti, S. V. S. R. K., Kaas, Q.,
Eletsky, A., Huang, P.-S., Johnsen, W. A., Greisen, P. J., Rocklin, G. J.,
Song, Y., Linsky, T. W., Watkins, A., Rettie, S. A., Xu, X., Carter, L. P.,
Bonneau, R., Olson, J. M., Coutsias, E., Correnti, C. E., Szyperski, T.,
Craik, D. J., and Baker, D. (2016) Accurate de novo design of
hyperstable constrained peptides. Nature 538, 329−335.
(22) Chevalier, A., Silva, D.-A., Rocklin, G. J., Hicks, D. R., Vergara, R.,
Murapa, P., Bernard, S. M., Zhang, L., Lam, K.-H., Yao, G., Bahl, C. D.,
Miyashita, S.-I., Goreshnik, I., Fuller, J. T., Koday, M. T., Jenkins, C. M.,
Colvin, T., Carter, L., Bohn, A., Bryan, C. M., Fernández-Velasco, D. A.,
Stewart, L., Dong, M., Huang, X., Jin, R., Wilson, I. A., Fuller, D. H., and
Baker, D. (2017) Massively parallel de novo protein design for targeted
therapeutics. Nature 550, 74−79.
(23) King, N. P., Bale, J. B., Sheffler, W., McNamara, D. E., Gonen, S.,
Gonen, T., Yeates, T. O., and Baker, D. (2014) Accurate design of co-
assembling multi-component protein nanomaterials. Nature 510, 103−
108.
(24) Combs, S. A., DeLuca, S. L., DeLuca, S. H., Lemmon, G. H.,
Nannemann, D. P., Nguyen, E. D., Willis, J. R., Sheehan, J. H., and
Meiler, J. (2013) Small-molecule ligand docking into comparative
models with Rosetta. Nat. Protoc. 8, 1277−1298.
(25) Mandell, D. J., Coutsias, E. A., and Kortemme, T. (2009) Sub-
angstrom accuracy in protein loop reconstruction by robotics-inspired
conformational sampling. Nat. Methods 6, 551−552.
(26) Puthenveetil, S., Liu, D. S., White, K. A., Thompson, S., and Ting,
A. Y. (2009) Yeast display evolution of a kinetically efficient 13-amino
acid substrate for lipoic acid ligase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 16430−
16438.

(27) Liu, D. S., Nivon, L. G., Richter, F., Goldman, P. J., Deerinck, T.
J., Yao, J. Z., Richardson, D., Phipps, W. S., Ye, A. Z., Ellisman, M. H.,
Drennan, C. L., Baker, D., and Ting, A. Y. (2014) Computational design
of a red fluorophore ligase for site-specific protein labeling in living cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, E4551−E4559.
(28) Uttamapinant, C., Sanchez, M. I, Liu, D. S, Yao, J. Z, White, K. A,
Grecian, S., Clark, S., Gee, K. R, and Ting, A. Y (2013) Site-specific
protein labeling using PRIME and chelation-assisted click chemistry.
Nat. Protoc. 8, 1620−1634.
(29) Yao, J. Z., Uttamapinant, C., Poloukhtine, A., Baskin, J. M.,
Codelli, J. A., Sletten, E. M., Bertozzi, C. R., Popik, V. V., and Ting, A. Y.
(2012) Fluorophore targeting to cellular proteins via enzyme-mediated
azide ligation and strain-promoted cycloaddition. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134,
3720−3728.
(30) Plaks, J. G., Falatach, R., Kastantin, M., Berberich, J. A., and Kaar,
J. L. (2015) Multisite clickable modification of proteins using lipoic acid
ligase. Bioconjugate Chem. 26, 1104−1112.
(31) Larkin, M. A., Blackshields, G., Brown, N. P., Chenna, R.,
McGettigan, P. A., McWilliam, H., Valentin, F., Wallace, I. M., Wilm, A.,
Lopez, R., Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., and Higgins, D. G. (2007)
Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 23, 2947−2948.
(32) Nordwald, E. M., Plaks, J. G., Snell, J. R., Sousa, M. C., and Kaar, J.
L. (2015) Crystallographic Investigation of Imidazolium Ionic Liquid
Effects on Enzyme Structure. ChemBioChem 16, 2456−2459.
(33) Das, S., Dixon, J. E., and Cho, W. (2003) Membrane-binding and
activation mechanism of PTEN. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100,
7491−7496.
(34) Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S., and Eliceiri, K. W. (2012) NIH
Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671−675.
(35) Wilkins, M. R., Gasteiger, E., Bairoch, A., Sanchez, J. C., Williams,
K. L., Appel, R. D., and Hochstrasser, D. F. (1998) Protein
identification and analysis tools in the ExPASy server. Methods Mol.
Biol. 112, 531−552.
(36) Raussens, V., Ruysschaert, J.-M., and Goormaghtigh, E. (2003)
Protein concentration is not an absolute prerequisite for the
determination of secondary structure from circular dichroism spectra:
a new scaling method. Anal. Biochem. 319, 114−121.
(37) Stein, A., and Kortemme, T. (2013) Improvements to robotics-
inspired conformational sampling in rosetta. PLoS One 8, e63090.
(38) Vetter, I. R., Baase, W. A., Heinz, D. W., Xiong, J. P., Snow, S., and
Matthews, B. W. (1996) Protein structural plasticity exemplified by
insertion and deletion mutants in T4 lysozyme. Protein Sci. 5, 2399−
2415.
(39) Gonzalez, C. E., Roberts, P., and Ostermeier, M. (2019) Fitness
Effects of Single Amino Acid Insertions and Deletions in TEM-1 β-
Lactamase. J. Mol. Biol. 431, 2320−2330.
(40) Song, M. S., Salmena, L., and Pandolfi, P. P. (2012) The
functions and regulation of the PTEN tumour suppressor. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 283−296.
(41) Sun, Z., Liu, Q., Qu, G., Feng, Y., and Reetz, M. T. (2019) Utility
of B-Factors in Protein Science: Interpreting Rigidity, Flexibility, and
Internal Motion and Engineering Thermostability. Chem. Rev. 119,
1626−1665.

4002

https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00533
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 3993−4002

